CaseStudyId: 35397
Title: 
    Biological characterisation and impact of HIV drug resistance
    

ImpactDetails

    The underpinning research described above has provided the key evidence
      base to inform national and international strategy on the treatment of
      HIV. Our work provided an initial understanding of the molecular basis of
      drug resistance, and was pivotal to the development and implementation of
      sequence-based resistance testing across the NHS, along with the
      establishment of a national surveillance scheme. With more appropriate
      first-line therapy, based on individual resistance patterns, the
      subsequent risk of drug failure due to resistance has been reduced,
      leading to an overall reduction in resistance. Transmitted drug resistance
      in the UK has fallen from over 15% of new infections in 2000-2, to fewer
      than 10% in 2007 and onwards [a] representing a reduction of 300
      new infections with such resistance per year.
    Our work is referenced widely in treatment guidelines around the world.
      The British HIV Association recommend, based on our evidence of
      significant levels of transmitted resistance, that drug resistance testing
      is undertaken BEFORE initiating therapy [b] Our data represent the
        first such demonstration in the UK in 2001, leading directly to a change
        in national guidleines. The International AIDS Society-USA
      guidelines also cite our research and named input in support of their
      recommendations on the mutational definitions of antiretroviral drug
      resistance [c].
    Through a linked biological-epidemiological approach to measuring drug
      resistance, we have established the national surveillance structure, on
      behalf of Public health England. In 2011, we provided evidence to the
      House of Lords Select Committee on HIV and AIDS, the report from which
      stated; "It is essential, though, that treatment does not cause
        longer-term harm. If a person fails to stick to a regime of
        antiretroviral drugs, it can lead to the development of drug resistance,
        as has been seen with antibiotics. Were such resistance to become
        widespread, treatment efforts would be hampered in the long-term. This
        is closely monitored. The United Kingdom has the largest resistance
        database linked to clinical data in the world, to ensure that any
        problems are quickly identified. With no vaccine and no cure, it is
        important that surveillance systems robustly monitor and contain the
        risk of emerging antiretroviral resistance (see paras 227 to 228)" [d].
    In 2012, UCL led a major Seminar on the "Impact of HIV drug resistance in
      the resource poor world" in conjunction with the WHO in Geneva, 2012 [e].
      This was the first such meeting to include both generic and proprietary
      drug producers, to establish the future of rational drug treatment for the
      developing world. As a consequence, in 2013, the World Health Organisation
      (WHO) changed its surveillance strategy to better guide appropriate
      interventions in the developing world. Based on our findings from the UK
      population, WHO established a monitoring function, in parallel with the
      rollout of antiretroviral therapy [f]. As one of five such
      specialist Laboratories worldwide, we supported this monitoring. In light
      of our recent finding of an increase in transmitted drug resistance in
      Eastern Africa, the WHO has altered their surveillance approach towards a
      more feasible and cost-effective approach of those individuals starting
      therapy. We are currently in the vanguard of a major policy change within
      the WHO regarding recommendations for first and second line therapies for
      the developing world. This will affect 35 million infected individuals,
      with the likely impact being the introduction of viral quantification
      monitoring to guide switch from first to second line therapy. This is
      evidenced through a joint publication with WHO (e) and reference to our
      work in the 2013 revised WHO Guidelines [Chapter 7 ref 165 g].
    
ImpactSummary

    UCL investigators have been at the forefront of characterising and
      assessing HIV drug resistance since 1990, soon after the very first HIV
      drug was licenced. There are currently more than 25 drugs available, and
      our work over the last 23 years has directly determined how best these
      therapies are used, and monitored in infected patients. We have extended
      our work to a global perspective, in conjunction with the current rollout
      of antiretroviral therapy to areas of the world devastated by the epidemic
      - work which now informs guidelines of the World Health Organisation
      (WHO), and has resulted in a marked reduction in mortality.
    
UnderpinningResearch

    An estimated 35 million people are infected with HIV worldwide, with the
      vast majority living in the resource poor world. HIV therapy is now
      provided as a combination of three drugs, in order to prevent drug
      resistance developing. Our research has been at the forefront of
      understanding the nature and impact of drug resistance and has therefore
      shaped all national and international treatment guidelines since the early
      1990's.
    Our work started with the development of novel gene sequencing and
      allele-specific methods to show that drug resistance underpinned the lack
      of treatment effect within the first European pivotal trial of zidovudine
      monotherapy (Concorde trial) [1] and subsequent dual therapy Delta
      trial [2] (Tedder, Loveday, Weller). Indeed, this
      established for the first time the use of genetic markers to directly
      inform clinical practice. Subsequent rollout of viral gene sequence
      technology to UK diagnostic laboratories led to the establishment of the
      UK HIV Drug Resistance Database in 1999, based within UCL (Pillay)
      and the MRC Clinical Trials Unit, now part of UCL (Dunn, Porter).
      The purpose was to map the spread of drug resistance by HIV in the UK,
      including the transmission of resistance [3] (Pillay, Phillips,
        Sabin, Geretti). Indeed, applying new phylogenetic approaches, we
      have demonstrated a continual spread of drug resistance viruses (Hue,
        Kellam), and their ability to replicate fully, thus requiring new
      classes of HIV therapy [4]. From this base we have extended our
      national collaboration into a large European dataset, to provide the
      definitive evidence for the detrimental impact of transmitted drug
      resistance on outcome of therapy [5] (Pillay, Phillips, Cozzi
        Lepri, Dunn, Porter), and thus determine the optimal therapeutic
      strategies to maximise patient benefit.
    During the last 10 years, we have taken this knowledge to map
      transmission of drug resistance on a global scale. Through describing
      resistance emerging during the pivotal MRC-funded DART trial of therapy in
      Africa (Dunn, Pillay), and subsequently determining the risks and
      predictors of such resistance (Gupta, Cozzi Lepri), we highlighted
      the risk of a large scale transmission of resistance across the resource
      poor world. Recently, we have indeed demonstrated that such transmission
      is now a reality, in a paper co-authored with the World Health
      Organisation [6] (Gupta, Pillay). This commitment to apply our
        research to the areas of greatest need has led Deenan Pillay to be
        seconded from UCL to become Director of the Wellcome Trust Africa Centre
        for Health and Population Sciences, in South Africa-in the highest HIV
        prevalance area in the world.
    UCL Investigators
    Richard Tedder, Senior Lecturer, Reader, then Professor of Virology
      (1986-)
      Clive Loveday, Senior Lecturer then Professor of Virology (1990- 2005)
      Ian Weller Professor of HIV Medicine (1987-2010)
      Deenan Pillay, Reader, then Professor of Virology (2003-)
      Andrew Phillips, Senior Lecturer, Reader, then Professor of Epidemiology
      (1990-)
      Caroline Sabin, Senior Lecturer, Reader then Professor of Medical
      Statistics (1996-)
      Paul Kellam, Senior Lecturer, Reader then Professor of Host Pathogen
      Research (2000-) (now joint appointment with Wellcome Trust Sanger
      Institute)
      Stephane Hue, Post-Doctoral Research Assistant, then Lecturer in Virology
      (2006-)
      Ravi Gupta, Clinical Research Fellow, then WT Intermediate Clinical
      Fellow, Senior Lecturer in Infectious Diseases (2007-)
      Alessandra Cozzi Lepri, Senior Lecturer in Epidemiology (2005-)
      Anna Maria Geretti, Senior Lecturer in Virology (2005-2011)
      David Dunn, Senior Lecturer, Reader (2000-)
      Kholoud Porter, Senior Lecturer, Reader, Professor (1997-)
    