CaseStudyId: 36384
Title: 
    Improving the diagnosis and management of Dementia with Lewy bodies by
      imaging dopamine transporter uptake in the basal ganglia
    

ImpactDetails

    Impact on clinical practice
    The research described above has led to dopamine transporter imaging by
      FP-CIT (DaTSCAN) SPECT becoming the standard method of diagnosis for DLB
      around the world. In 2005, revised clinical criteria were issued by the
      DLB Consortium, which concluded that "Low striatal DAT activity also
        occurs in DLB but is normal in AD, making DAT scanning particularly
        useful in distinguishing between the two disorders" [a]. In
      July 2006, the European indication for DaTSCAN (previously authorised only
      for patients with clinically uncertain Parkinsonian syndrome) was expanded
      to include differentiation of probable DLB from Alzheimer's Disease. In
      2006, the method was incorporated into NICE clinical guidelines for
      dementia. These recommended that:
    "Dopaminergic iodine-123-radiolabelled
      2-carbomethoxy-3-(4-iodophenyl)-N-(3-fluoropropyl) nortropane (FP-CIT)
      SPECT should be used to help establish the diagnosis in those with
      suspected dementia with Lewy bodies (DLB) if the diagnosis is in doubt" [b].
    That this technique has now become standard clinical practice is shown by
      its inclusion in information provided in leaflets and online by
      Alzheimer's Research UK, who say "To help make a specific diagnosis of
        DLB, a type of scan called a DaT scan may be used to look for changes in
        the brain which are more common in this type of dementia" [c].
      A 2011 paper from Southampton University Hospitals Trust which
      retrospectively reviewed 80 patients who had undergone FP-CIT (DaTSCAN)
      SPECT over a one-year period, concluded that "It would seem that
        DaTSCAN imaging has a marked influence on the working clinical diagnosis
        and subsequent management of patients with suspected DLB" [d].
    Impact on patients
    Early, accurate diagnosis of DLB, in particular its differentiation from
      Alzheimer's disease, is important for optimal management. It may provide a
      better understanding of the symptoms and may induce changes in the
      clinical management of patients, allowing initiation of effective
      pharmacotherapy, and avoiding the consequences of neuroleptic sensitivity.
      Patients and carers can be provided with information about the likely
      symptomatology and illness course, which may help families, relatives and
      caregivers to make correct decisions and future plans. Altogether this
      translates into better management of patients with reduced carer burden
      and better clinical outcome.
    FDA approval
    In 2009, GE Healthcare submitted an application to the US Food and Drug
      Administration (FDA) requesting to license DaTSCAN for patients presenting
      with symptoms or signs suggestive of dopaminergic neurodegeneration. This
      application widely referenced the research described above, and Walker
      provided expert advice to the panel. The FDA concluded that the best
      clinical data provided for the application came from the autopsy study and
      the application was approved in August 2009 [e].
    Impact on guidelines
    Walker contributed to guidelines issued in 2009 by the European
      Association of Nuclear Medicine on DaT SPECT imaging which recommended
      (citing the research described above) that "[123I]FP-CIT imaging is
        indicated for the differentiation of dementia with Lewy bodies from
        other dementias" [f]. Guidelines issued in 2011 by EFNS
      (European Federation of Neurological Societies) and ENS (European
      Neurological Society) cite our work in support of using 123I-FP-CIT SPECT
      for distinguishing DLB from non-DLB dementia [g].
    Industry investment in research
    The FP-CIT (DaTSCAN) ligand belongs to GE Healthcare. There has been an
      active collaboration between GE Healthcare and UCL, with Walker being
      involved in the design and execution of a recent European study and with
      GE Healthcare sponsoring explorative investigator-led studies (Morgan et
      al 2013) and a PhD project within the group.
    
ImpactSummary

    Research at UCL has greatly contributed to the understanding of the
      dopaminergic system in Dementia with Lewy bodies (DLB) with an initial
      publication in Lancet 1999 showing that patients with DLB have reduced
      uptake of dopamine transporter compared to patients with Alzheimer's
      disease and that this could be a useful biomarker for DLB. Since then the
      research conducted on imaging of dopamine transporter uptake has had
      national and international impact and significantly contributed to a
      change made in the Revised Clinical Criteria for the diagnosis of Dementia
      with Lewy bodies (McKeith et al 2005) which now includes "low dopamine
      transporter uptake in the basal ganglia demonstrated by SPECT imaging" as
      a "suggestive feature" for DLB.
    
UnderpinningResearch

    Dementia with Lewy bodies (DLB) is a form of dementia that accounts for
      up to 15 per cent of all cases of dementia in older people. It affects
      over 100,000 people in the UK, and is increasing as the population ages.
      DLB is difficult to diagnose, and is frequently mistaken for Alzheimer's
      disease (AD). This leads to worse outcomes for patients, as prognosis, the
      course of the disease and the clinical management of DLB differ in some
      important aspects from other dementias such as Alzheimer's disease. The
      research programme described below aimed to address the problem of
      frequent misdiagnosis by developing a new brain imaging technique that
      measures dopamine transporter uptake in the basal ganglia.
    Early work carried out by Dr Zuzana Walker at UCL tested the idea that
      imaging dopaminergic deficit in DLB (using the dopaminergic presynaptic
      ligand FP-CIT and single photon emission computed tomography &#8212; SPECT) had
      the potential to distinguish DLB from Alzheimer's disease. This was
      published as an autopsy case study in the Lancet [1]. The concept
      was further tested in a single centre study with initial autopsy results [2].
      Following on from this research, other single centre studies (for example,
      a study conducted by O'Brien in Newcastle in 2004) replicated these
      results.
    Over the five years following, we undertook a longitudinal follow-up of
      the original imaging cohort. This led to the largest published
      clinico-imaging-pathological cohort of patients with dementia and FP-CIT
      SPECT in the world. We demonstrated that dopamine transporter imaging has
      excellent sensitivity and specificity for the diagnosis of DLB when
      compared to the gold standard (i.e. autopsy diagnosis) [3], [4].
    In 2007 the diagnostic utility of dopamine transporter imaging in
      dementia was further confirmed in a large European multinational imaging
      trial involving 20 centres in 10 countries. This study was led by McKeith
      (Newcastle) and sponsored by GE Healthcare (who had provided the ligand,
      which is marketed commercially as DaTSCAN). Walker was a collaborator in
      the study and substantially contributed to the design, execution and
      publication. The results showed that dopamine transporter imaging has
      excellent sensitivity and specificity as a test (biomarker) for DLB [5].
      The utility of dopamine transporter imaging by FP-CIT (DaTSCAN) SPECT was
      further confirmed in a one-year follow-up study of the original cohort of
      patients entered into this trial. The follow-up study concentrated on
      patients with possible diagnosis of DLB (some but not sufficient features
      of DLB to fulfil criteria for probable DLB) [6].
    Despite the excellent results of the FP-CIT (DaTSCAN) SPECT in
      distinguishing DLB from AD, results from a further study led Walker to
      urge caution when interpreting reduction in dopamine transporter imaging
      as a diagnostic biomarker of DLB in the differential diagnosis of
      Frontotemporal Dementia and DLB [7].
    The results from the largest study of possible DLB cases come from a
      recently completed European study designed by Walker and sponsored by GE
      Healthcare entitled "DaTSCAN Imaging in Subjects with an Uncertain
      Diagnosis of Dementia with Lewy Bodies". The first results were published
      in an abstract in March 2013 at the American Academy of Neurology Meeting
      [8]. The new data show that DaTSCAN imaging indicated abnormal
      uptake in 43% of subjects with possible DLB at baseline. Physicians'
      confidence and ability to make a correct diagnosis of probable DLB
      significantly improved following dopamine transporter imaging by FP-CIT
      (DaTSCAN) SPECT.
    