CaseStudyId: 36403
Title: 
    Biocatalysis integrated with chemistry and engineering (BiCE) to speed
      development of green pharmaceutical processes
    

ImpactDetails

    Since 2008, BiCE programme research has had wide-ranging impact, from the
      establishment of a successful spinout company to commercialisation of a
      miniature bioreactor technology. A number of pharmaceutical companies now
      using BiCE enzymes are benefiting from cost and time savings in their
      production process, along with reduced waste production. These impacts are
      summarised below and can be traced back directly to the original research
      outputs identified above.
    Spinout company creation: To capitalise on the knowledge
      generated in the BiCE programme, Prof John Ward and researchers at UCL set
      up the synthetic biology spin-out company, Synthace Ltd, in 2011. This
      aims to make high-value, bio-based chemical and biological products
      through the application of synthetic biology. It is the UK's first
      dedicated synthetic biology company start-up.
    Synthace is based in UCL Biochemical Engineering and had completed two
      rounds of investment funding as of 31 July 2013. These successful funding
      rounds have brought its total financing to &#163;1.8m with TSB funding of
      &#163;500,000 and a recent second stage finance of &#163;1.3m from Sofinnova
      Partners' Green Seed Fund and a syndicate of angel investors [a]. The CEO
      of Synthace said: "With its world-leading development and scale-up
        facilities, UCL Biochemical Engineering is the ideal place for a
        start-up like Synthace as we seek to industrialise advances in synthetic
        biology" [b]. Synthace has licensed enzyme libraries established in
      the BiCE programme and currently uses these in sizeable commercial
      contracts from three major companies. In March 2013, the Universities and
      Science Minister, The Rt Hon David Willetts, recognised the contribution
      of Synthace to an "increasingly important" section of the UK
      economy, when he said: "Companies like Synthace can help the UK
        exploit the massive potential that synthetic biology has both here and
        abroad. By making investment in technology now, it will ensure that in
        ten years' time the UK is at the forefront of the global race when it
        comes to commercialising new technologies" [b].
    Economic benefits in terms of new products and cost and time
          savings: Since 2008, many of the new bioprocess tools
      developed as part of the research described above have been adopted by
      consortium companies for their industrial biocatalytic processes. Examples
      of the impact of these technologies include:
    
      
Commercialisation of a miniature stirred bioreactor technology.
        The UCL design for a novel miniature stirred bioreactor technology
        enabling direct scale-up from 30 mL to 10L was commercialised via HEL
        Ltd and has been on the market since 2008. The miniature bioreactor
        enables rapid testing of new fermentation applications with data
        gathering that fully matches the large scale. This saves time and cost
        in avoiding running large-scale fermentations while testing a
        fermentation protocol. These miniature bioreactors (30-500 mL)
        represented a new product line for the company [c] [text removed for
        publication].
      
Industrial adoption of high throughput bioprocess design
          methodologies. A number of BiCE programme industrial partners have
        now adopted UCL high-throughput and microscale technologies to help
        speed the design of new biocatalytic processes. These include Lonza,
        Merck &amp; Co, Evonik and DSM. As an indication of the impact achieved
        the Executive Director of BioProcess Technology &amp; Expression from
        Merck &amp; Co has reported a 3-to-5-fold throughput improvement
            by the application of microscale-based techniques. This
        accelerated the pipeline in multiple ways including: shortening the
        duration from catalyst screen to delivery of mg quantities of initial
        material by 70%, thereby enabling a 3-fold increase in the number of
        projects that can be handled by a single scientist and widening of the
        catalyst library that can be rapidly screened by 3 to 5 times [d]. This
        enables them to complete customer projects in a shorter time or with the
        commitment of fewer FTEs due to the parallel nature of the HEL miniature
        bioreactor systems. In addition UCL staff are now providing consultancy
        services to additional companies on how to implement these
        methodologies.
    
    Economic benefits from screening and utilisation of BiCE enzyme
          libraries: Libraries of engineered enzymes have been provided
      to company partners for use in their internal high-throughput screening
      programmes. Licensing of these libraries saves each company the time and
      costs involved in in-house library generation e.g. for a company to
      construct and validate an enzyme library containing tens to hundreds of
      mutants, rather than using UCL's libraries, might demand full-time
      commitment of 2 FTE for 6 months. For example, Almac has used over 100 of
      these enzymes to identify transaminases that are able to catalyse
      amination of the substrates Almac uses in its in-house drug discovery
      programmes and for customer contracts. In 2010 Almac identified one TAm
      variant that catalyses amine formation on a compound for a pharmaceutical
      company customer. They are now scaling up production of this TAm ready for
      commercial-scale utilisation. The head of biocatalysis at Almac said: "The
        new enzyme process is one third of the cost of the chemical
          process and the yield of the process has
          increased from 10% to over 90%" [e]. Since then, Almac
      and UCL have had a royalty-sharing agreement for the commercial
      exploitation of this and the other transaminases. In a similar vein,
      Sigma-Aldrich has since 2006 used one of the BiCE TK variants for
      commercial preparation of D-xylulose-5-phosphate and a TAm variant to
      prepare pyridoxamine-5-phosphate. The Head of Research Specialities from
      Sigma-Aldrich (SIAL) notes that "The direct comparison of selective
        one-step enzymic reactions to chemical routes of synthesis show the
        advantage of replacing non-selective chemical routes, which then involve
        also significant purification efforts after the reaction(s). The
        beneficial effect on safety, health and environment improvement by the
        enzymatic route fits well with the current sustainability goals at
        Sigma-Aldrich." [f]
    Environmental benefits arising from adoption of biocatalysis:
      It is widely recognised in the chemical industry that biocatalysis
      generates environmental benefits when used to replace chemical approaches
      that require multiple steps and the use of protection/deprotection
      reagents. Industrial adoption of BiCE enzyme variants for commercial
      production of chemicals and pharmaceutical intermediates, as described
      above, has major environmental benefits. For example, Almac's head of
      biocatalysis noted: "Recent success using a BiCE transaminase enzyme
        has resulted in the removal of 8 steps of chemistry using a transaminase
        enzyme from the BiCE project. As you can imagine this has a major input
        into cost of goods by lowering reagent and energy usage and very
        importantly, waste production" [f]. Likewise, SIAL has obtained
      similar benefits since 2008 through exploitation of a BiCE TK enzyme for
      the synthesis of xylulose-5-phosphate and a transaminase single step route
      to pyridoxamine-5`-phosphate, both metabolic intermediates useful for
      research purposes. These enzyme processes replace multiple chemical steps
      in the synthesis of these products, with the benefit that no costly and
      hard-to-dispose-of organic solvents need to be used [f].
    New job creation: The establishment of Synthace in 2011 and
      its subsequent success in raising investment funding has led directly to
      the creation of 7 new jobs [b]. Likewise, Almac's association with UCL and
      adoption of our advanced biocatalyst technologies "has resulted in
        significant growth of biocatalysis research at Almac including increased
        staff numbers" [f]. In a new business plan finalised in July 2013
      HEL Ltd committed to the creation of 4 new jobs to support their growing
      miniature stirred bioreactor product line [d].
    Knowledge transfer to the wider industrial community: The
      wider uptake of BiCE programme outputs has also been achieved through
      incorporation of BiCE-related material in a number of the industrial
      modules contributing to the UCL MBI&#174; Training
        Programme. Modules using this material include Rapid Fermentation
      Process Development, Design of Experiments for Bioprocess Optimisation and
      Industrial Biocatalysis and Biorefining. These modules have been attended
      by 157 industrial delegates from over 50 companies since 2008, with
      several customers having used multiple courses throughout the five-year
      period covered.
    
ImpactSummary

    UCL research has been instrumental in creating critically needed new
      biocatalysts and bioprocess technologies for industrial biocatalytic
      process development. These have impact across the UK chemical and
      pharmaceutical sectors. BiCE enzyme technologies have been exploited
      through the formation of a spin-out company, Synthace, generating
      investment of &#163;1.8m and creation of 7 new jobs. Commercial utilisation of
      BiCE enzymes by company partners has led to environmental benefits through
      sustainable syntheses and reduced waste generation. BiCE high-throughput
      bioprocess technologies have also been adopted to speed biocatalytic
      process development. UCL established a parallel miniature stirred
      bioreactor system as a new product line for HEL Ltd. [text removed for
      publication]. Related knowledge transfer activities have also benefited
      some 157 industrial employees from over 50 companies since 2008.
    
UnderpinningResearch

    The multi-disciplinary BiCE (Bioconversion &#8212; Chemistry &#8212; Engineering
      Interface) programme at UCL, conducted between 2004 and 2008, established
      a new integrated approach to development of biocatalysts and biocatalytic
      processes. This combined aspects of synthetic chemistry, molecular biology
      and process engineering to generate novel biocatalysts with increased
      productivity for application in the chemical and pharmaceutical
      industries. The programme also established a range of technologies to
      facilitate the rapid design and scale-up of green, more environmentally
      friendly, industrial biocatalytic processes. This new approach was shared
      with 13 industrial partners, enabling the early identification of all
      potential bottlenecks for efficient biocatalytic process development, from
      biocatalyst discovery through to process design and scale-up.
    The underpinning research delivered a range of tools for synthetic
      biology, enzyme engineering and biocatalyst screening, as well as new
      enzyme variants and E. coli strains, enabling synthesis of
      important pharmaceutical intermediates (chiral ketodiols and aminodiols).
      Building on work from 2000 to 2003, which resulted in patents [8], the
      BiCE programme used this technology to engineer enzyme variants now used
      by the programme's company partners. Automated, high-throughput methods
      for biocatalyst process evaluation were also developed, along with novel
      miniature stirred bioreactor technologies that help facilitate the rapid
      establishment of scalable biocatalytic and chemo-enzymatic synthetic
      routes.
    Over 70% of pharmaceutical compounds contain amine functionalities and
      many biologically active natural products contain chiral amino alcohols.
      While chemical methods exist for their asymmetric synthesis, these are
      generally step intensive or consume expensive and frequently toxic
      catalysts or chiral auxilliaries. The underpinning BiCE research addressed
      key bottlenecks in the development of novel, industrially useful
      biocatalytic processes for the synthesis of amino alcohols. First,
      researchers constructed a completely de novo metabolic pathway
      consisting of transketolase (TK) and transaminase (TAm) in E.coli,
      using a novel mix-and-match plasmid technology, to produce the chiral
      aminodiol 2-amino-1,3,4-butanetriol [1]. To diversify this pathway and
      access a broader range of substrates and useful aminodiol products, over
      100 new transaminases, including the versatile omega-transaminases, were
      identified from a range of organisms by metagenomics. These were then
      isolated, cloned into E.coli, and screened for broadened substrate
      selectivity and increased activity [2]. In parallel, novel targeted
      directed evolution strategies were invented using phylogenetic and
      structural information to engineer TK mutants capable of processing a
      range of new substrates including aliphatic and cyclic aldehydes [3], and
      to have improved product enantioselectivities. Next, automated
      high-throughput and process modelling approaches were created [4] and
      researchers designed a miniature and parallel stirred bioreactor system
      that is predictive of larger-scale bioreactor performance [5].
      Underpinning all this work was development of a suite of novel automated
      high-throughput assays for quantification of TK activity and stability
      [6]. Finally, complete integration of all the BiCE component elements was
      demonstrated and published [7]. This utilised all the BiCE technologies to
      rapidly establish a preparative scale, two-step process suitable for
      manufacture of 2S-amino-1,3S-pentanediol on an industrial scale.
    The BiCE programme brought together a multi-disciplinary team of staff.
      The project was managed initially by Prof John Woodley (Biochemical
      Engineering) and then by Prof Gary Lye (Biochemical Engineering). Key
      research was led by Prof Paul Dalby (Biochemical Engineering), Prof John
      Ward (Structural and Molecular Biology, who joined Biochemical Engineering
      in 2012), Prof Helen Hailes (Chemistry) and Dr Frank Baganz (Biochemical
      Engineering). The project involved 6 Research Associates (RAs) and 5
      associated doctoral students. Of the RAs Dr Martina Micheletti
      (Biochemical Engineering) joined the UCL staff in 2007 while the other RAs
      all progressed to industrial careers.
    