CaseStudyId: 36411
Title: 
    Building climate resilience in cities of the Global South
    

ImpactDetails

    The DPU's research has contributed to building climate preparedness and
      resilience in the urban
      Global South by enhancing existing strategies adopted by affected
      communities, and introducing
      new methods for socio-technological structures to deal with cumulative and
      sudden shocks. The
      transfer of specialist knowledge holds impacts for policy-makers in
      Bangladesh, Mozambique, and
      India, within aid organisations (e.g. DFID and Oxfam), and for urban
      planners and residents of
      vulnerable cities. Impacts range from enhancing citizens' voices in local
      governance structures and
      supporting transparent decision-making to guiding aid policy and
      governmental interventions, and
      aiding urban planners through policy tools to plan for more resilient
      cities. Perhaps most
      significantly, DPU research contributed to culture shifts in development
      and donor organisations
      around the world, reinforcing changes in fundamental approaches to climate
      change resilience.
    At the local government level in the largest cities in countries like
      Bangladesh and Mozambique,
      research was used to build resilience through policy advice to
      governmental programmes. Moving
      from mitigation to adaptation is critical in Bangladesh, frequently
      affected by the effects of climate
      variability and climate change. Dhaka has experienced nine major floods in
      the last 55 years,
      disproportionally affecting the 3.4 million vulnerable urban poor with
      limited/no access to services.
      The act of documenting community responses to climate variability [e]
      facilitated the development
      of strategies that moved from climate risk mitigation to planned
      adaptation, via policy and financial
      decisions seeking to address climate impacts before or soon after they
      were manifest. Research
      recommendations by DPU supported policy and planning for the development
      of pro-poor land-use
      planning and tenure security options within Dhaka's local government, and
      on the design of
      buildings and infrastructure to reduce climate change risks. This dialogue
      was facilitated through
      several focus group discussions and a multi-stakeholder workshop in August
      2009, which had 46
      participants, including community members, governmental actors and
      representatives from
      organisations working on urban poverty, climate change and urban planning
      issues in Bangladesh.
      Three lines of action were identified: access to basic urban services;
      land-use planning and the
      built environment; and disaster management strategies. The ongoing actions
      by municipalities and
      the coping strategies of the urban poor were mapped to identify synergies
      and generate
      recommendations for future action. The resulting strategies were
      consolidated at the multi-stakeholder
      workshop and endorsed in the plans and programmes of governmental agencies
      [1].
    Likewise, in Maputo, an innovative participatory research process
      encouraged working
      partnerships between diverse actors with the aim of bridging the gap
      between policy rhetoric and
      action. This city of 1 million inhabitants (half below the poverty line)
      is subject to frequent flooding
      and vulnerable to rising sea levels. Communities described the drainage
      faults associated with
      uncontrolled waste disposal as the main factor influencing vulnerabilities
      to climate change in the
      research area, Chamanculo C district. Seeking to address this challenge,
      in partnership with the
      National Fund for the Environment of Mozambique (FUNAB), Reading
      University and York
      University, DPU research supported networking in 2012-13 between
      residents, private sector
      actors, and government authorities, including the Ministry for
      Coordination of Environmental Affairs
      (MICOA), the National Disaster Management Institute (INGC), and Maputo
      Municipality.
    The first step involved the development of a process of community
      organisation that led to the
      constitution of a local planning committee on climate change (CPC). These
      CPC members
      represent different interest groups rarely represented in such
      negotiations, such as the elderly,
      youth, housewives, traders and salaried workers. The CPC has five
      community members elected
      by local residents, who met weekly from April to July 2012. They held
      meetings with experts and
      institutions, working independently of the DPU/FUNAB project team to
      develop and implement a
      Local Action Plan for Climate Compatible Development with the municipal
      government [2]. While
      this research engaged actors already concerned with climate change (MICOA;
      INGC), through the
      CPC it also brought climate change to urban governance bodies where it
      previously did not exist.
    Real changes in the lives of Maputo residents were already underway
      towards the end of the
      impact period. The CPC had begun negotiating the implementation of the
      strategies emerging from
      its dialogues within the informal settlement of Chamanculo C. These
      included new provisions for
      recycling and composting centres, and the establishment of waste
      collection points to alleviate the
      impacts of flooding on blocked drainage. To achieve their goals, the CPC
      established links with
      local associations, private operators and NGOs involved in waste
      management. Out of the Local
      Action Plan, drawn up in July 2013, the CPC has also begun to develop an
      environmental
      education programme with the Maputo University Eduardo Mondlane for better
      training in climate
      change issues, correct usage of water, and treatment of domestic waste,
      and it used this
      educational process to extend networks within and between communities, and
      to mobilise
      residents for the regular cleaning and maintenance of drainage channels [2;
        p.9]. In a city whose
      fast and unregulated growth had outstripped the provision of basic
      services, particularly in the
      context of a changing climate, this community-led programme demonstrated
      to local policy-makers
      that residents &#8212; even the relatively uneducated &#8212; can handle climate
      information if there is an entry
      point that relates such information to their own experience, such as
      flooding [3]. Policy makers
      subsequently have no vowed to extend this programme to other
      neighbourhoods.
    Working at the NGO level, DPU researchers are also closely involved in
      the design and
      operationalisation of new approaches to the study of climate change
      resilience in Latin America. In
      2012&#8212;13, the DPU advised Oxfam's Latin America and Caribbean (LAC) office
      on managing risk
      and working with vulnerability in relation to disaster risk reduction. Dr
      Camillo Boano (Senior
      Lecturer) and Dr Alexandre Apsan Frediani (Lecturer) facilitated a
      three-day workshop in 2012 with
      government officials, civil society organisations, and Oxfam officers from
      La Paz, Guatemala and
      the regional office in Mexico City. This contributed to ongoing action
      within Oxfam's LAC office in
      re-shaping their urban strategies in relation to risk and vulnerability
      reduction, shifting again from
      mitigation strategies to addressing the actual root causes of risk
      production.
    For example, this collaboration has redefined the initial terms of
      reference of a project undertaken
      in La Paz and Guatemala City away from more traditional reactive
      mitigation strategies towards the
      exploration of local and innovative adaptation plans [4]. This was
      demonstrated in the resulting
      report, Exploring Oxfam's room for manoeuvre to address the production
        of urban risk, which
      sought to highlight the social drivers of risk in La Paz and Guatemala
      City [5; especially pp. 6, 10,
        22]. In particular, DPU research has underpinned recommendations for
      further action, including
      expanding the knowledge base on intra-community perceptions of risk
      (disaggregating community
      experiences by gender, disability, tenure status, etc.), as well as
      redefining the understanding of
      urban risk as a social and political product; and collapsing the divide
      between urban planning and
      the field of disaster risk reduction, which as noted has tended to be more
      reactive [5; pp. 51, 53].
    The Future-Proofing Cities project [b] also spurred
      international donors to reassess their aid
      priorities to support effective local responses that could support
      resilient urban development. The
      project recommendations were adopted by DFID in 2012 as a diagnostic tool
      to guide its climate-change
	  portfolio and mechanisms for funding, resource, and project
      allocation throughout Asia,
      Latin America, and Africa [6]. The reach of this impact on
      international debates is demonstrated by
      the fact that the Future-Proofing Cities website has received over
      300,000 hits since December
      2012 and the report was downloaded over 2,000 times by users in multiple
      countries and
      organisations. This included municipal governments, leading developers and
      architects (e.g.
      Balfour), strategy consultants, technology providers (e.g. Siemens),
      funding institutions, and water
      and energy companies in the Global South. It also attracted the attention
      and endorsement of
      organisations such as the World Bank [7], Rockefeller Foundation,
      and Cities Alliances [6].
    Since March 2013, the same model has been applied in two Indian cities:
      Bangalore and Madurai,
      implemented through Future-Proofing Indian Cities with &#163;450,000
      committed by the Climate and
      Development Knowledge Network (partially funded by DFID) [8]. This
      is using the Future-Proofing
        Cities framework to undertake a participatory action planning
      process to develop urban risk
      diagnostics and action plans for Bangalore and Madurai. The diagnostic
      stage was completed in
      July 2013 and informed discussions with the state and municipal
      governments, service utilities and
      civic society organisations. Stakeholders in both cities prioritised a
      focus on the rehabilitation of
      infrastructure to develop future proofing strategies, which will inform
      the subsequent stages of the
      programme. In Madurai, this was endorsed at a city-wide consultation in
      September 2013
      organised by Development of Humane Action (DHAN) Foundation &#8212; now a
      partner in the project &#8212; which
      was attended by over 30 officials from the municipal corporation, plus
      other representatives
      from the City Technical Advisory Group (CTAG) and City Volunteer Technical
      Corps (CVTC).
    
ImpactSummary

    Research work into the development and transference of methods for
      climate readiness and
      resilience by Allen et al has created impacts at every stage of the
      planning process. In major cities
      of the Global South, such as Dhaka and Maputo, this research has made
      visible the material
      practices adopted by ordinary citizens to cope with climate variability,
      and has provided a
      systematic evaluation for policymakers and funders of strategies for
      proofing cities at scale. In turn
      it has facilitated new approaches to risk and vulnerability assessment &#8212;
      for instance, by integrating
      new perspectives into Maputo city planning, supporting methodological
      approaches to projects by
      Oxfam, and helping to shape policy tools and funding with organisations
      such as the Department
      for International Development (DFID).
    
UnderpinningResearch

    Floods, drought, unusually high temperatures and other shocks are
      projected to increase around
      the world due to climate change. Action-research by the Development
      Planning Unit (DPU) in the
      UCL Bartlett Faculty of the Built Environment has been exploring the
      intersection of urbanisation
      and climate change, with a focus on the generation and distribution of
      risks, vulnerabilities, and
      opportunities in the urban Global South. It examines how different
      epistemic communities frame
      these challenges, and traces the planned responses and everyday practices
      that seek to build
      more resilient cities. In particular, the DPU research has highlighted the
      importance of moving
      beyond traditional governmental and developmental responses related to the
      management and
      mitigation of climate change (e.g. reducing greenhouse gas emissions,
      responding to natural
      disasters), to exploring how cities can be better adapted to adjust to the
      changing climate &#8212; i.e.
      urban planning that responds to conditions of rising sea levels, floods,
      or climate variability [a, c].
    One strand of DPU research examines the practices of ordinary citizens in
      the making of
      environmentally just and resilient urban transitions. In the project on Adaptation
        to Climate Change
        in Cities (2008-10), Dr Cassidy Johnson (Lecturer during the period
      of research) and Dr Adriana
      Allen (Senior Lecturer) demonstrated how people living in informal
      settlements in Dhaka,
      Bangladesh adapt to climate variability and cope with changing
      environments. The key innovation
      in this work was the proposal that significant lessons can be drawn from
      examining how the urban
      poor are already managing conditions of increased vulnerability by drawing
      on their social, political
      and knowhow capital, and revealing how these strategies can be scaled up
      and supported at the
      policy level [e]. Similarly, in A
        Public-Private-People-Partnership for Climate Compatible
        Development in Maputo (2013), Dr Vanesa Cast&#225;n Broto (Lecturer)
      emphasises the voices of
      ordinary citizens, experimenting with different forms of dialogue in
      planning to support meaningful
      resident participation in the design of policy and planned responses at
      the local, national and
      international levels [d]. In particular, this project seeks to
      engage stakeholders who are traditionally
      excluded from the official planning process, including ordinary residents
      and informal traders.
    The second strand of DPU research looks specifically at the future of
      cities by focusing on the
      production and regulation of urban risks and vulnerabilities associated
      with climate change,
      carbonisation and `lock-in' energy systems, and the erosion of vital
      ecosystems services. Future-Proofing
        Cities, as funded by the Department for International Development
      (DFID) and led by
      Atkins UK, in partnership with the DPU (Allen, Cast&#225;n Broto; and Caren
      Levy, Senior Lecturer)
      examined the environmental risks faced across 129 cities in 20 developing
      countries. They
      developed five urban `typologies' or trajectories to support the design of
      interventions suited to
      specific environmental conditions and city types. These trajectories
      comprise: energy intensive
      cities with significant carbon footprints, cities affected by major
      climate hazards, cities with risks to
      regional support systems (water and food), cities facing multiple risks
      and cities with a low current
      risk profile. Over 100 policy options for future-proofing were scrutinised
      against their relevance to
      different urban trajectories of change, different levels of vulnerability,
      as well as their capacity to
      deliver integrated social, environmental and economic benefits and the
      capacities required for their
      successful implementation (governance, planning, finance and delivery
      requirements). The
      research reveals that the possibilities of cities to be resilient to
      multiple environmental risks are not
      just determined by their past trajectories, current vulnerabilities and
      future risks &#8212; but can be
      activated through sensitive diagnosis and wise interventions [b].
      The DPU team provided strategic
      guidance on the development of the analytical framework, and wrote up the
      case studies on these
      typologies in Bangkok, Maputo, Bangalore, Karachi and Nairobi. This
      research provided a nuanced
      framework to assess not only the multiple environmental risks faced by
      cities in the developing
      world but also the different degrees of vulnerability affecting their
      citizens.
    