CaseStudyId: 36431
Title: 
    Identifying the evidence base to support the development and
      implementation of psychological interventions for schizophrenia
    

ImpactDetails

    Our research provided a firm and detailed evidence base for what works
      best in treatments for schizophrenia. This work underpinned the
      development of NICE guidance in 2002 and the revision of this guidance in
      2009. The primary impact arising from this has been a major shift in
      service provision towards these types of treatments, and a resulting
      reduction in hospital admissions.
    NICE guideline on schizophrenia
    Until the publication of our review, the relative effectiveness of the
      various existing psychological interventions for schizophrenia was not
      well understood. We established that the most clinically effective
      psychological interventions were family interventions (FIs) and cognitive
      behavioural therapy (CBT) but not social skills training (which was
      commonly in use) or cognitive remediation. The paper provided the evidence
      base for the NICE schizophrenia guideline published in 2002 and its update
      in 2009 [a]. As a facilitator of the guideline Pilling led on the
      interpretation of the evidence for the guideline development group in 2002
      and also advised the 2009 guideline development group on the revision and
      interpretation of the review in light of any new evidence that emerged.
    Impact on services
    This in turn has had a considerable impact on commissioning. NICE
      Guidance for Commissioners now recommends psychological interventions for
      schizophrenia in accordance with our recommendations [b]. Family
      and CBT interventions for psychosis are now an integral part of all mental
      health services and are central to the delivery of Early Interventions
      Services for psychosis where greater emphasis is placed these
      interventions. The increased availability of CBT and FIs, supported in
      significant part by the implementation of the guideline has seen, over the
      past five years, FIs and CBTs offered to an estimated minimum of 150,000
      patients in the UK with an estimated uptake of around 100,000 [c].
    The update to the guidance in 2009 included a health economic assessment
      of the recommended interventions. If this model is applied to a
      (conservative) estimate of schizophrenia cases in the period 2008-13, it
      shows that the recommendations may have led to 9,000 fewer relapses and
      4,200 fewer hospital admissions attributable to the use of FIs, and 6,000
      fewer relapses and 3,200 fewer hospital admissions attributable to the use
      of CBT.
    Economic impacts
    The costs of schizophrenia are considerable &#8212; an estimated &#163;11.8 billion
      in England for the period 2008-13. Based on the modelling produced by
      NICE's health economic assessment (2009 guidance) the estimated cost
      saving from reduced hospital bed use associated with implementation of
      these guidelines is over &#163;28 million.
    Government policy
    Our work has prompted significant interest and sustained debate including
      a review by the Healthcare Commission (2008) and the All Party
      Parliamentary Mental Health Group (2010) report on the implementation of
      the NICE schizophrenia guideline [d]. Most recently the
      Schizophrenia Commission (2012) again re-stated the need to fully
      implement the recommendations of the NICE Schizophrenia Guideline based on
      the review by Pilling and colleagues [e].
    Professional training
    NICE guidelines provide the evidence for the Improving Access to
      Psychological Therapies (IAPT) programme of the Department of Health,
      which is the world's largest implementation programme for psychological
      therapies and which has trained over 3,000 psychological therapists in a
      range of NICE recommended psychological interventions.
    The guideline, based on the review, has also supported the development of
      a range of specialist training programmes, e.g. at the Institute of
      Psychiatry (KCL), in cognitive behavioural interventions for
      schizophrenia, as a core element of clinical psychology training and four
      national pilot programmes of psychological interventions in psychosis. The
      review has provided evidence to support the development of an IAPT
      competence framework for psychosis commissioned from Pilling and
      colleagues by the Department of Health and which provides the basis for
      the national curriculum and all national training programmes for
      psychological interventions for schizophrenia in England [f].
    International impacts
    In addition to its impact on NICE the review had a major impact
      internationally, supporting an increased emphasis on psychological
      interventions in schizophrenia guidelines including clinical guidelines on
      schizophrenia in Australia and New Zealand, Spain and Italy [g].
    The NICE (2002) schizophrenia guideline was rated by the WHO (Gabel et
      al, 2005) as the most methodologically superior of 24 national
      schizophrenia guidelines, a rating that was re-affirmed in 2011 (Gabel et
      al, 2011) [h].
    
ImpactSummary

    Schizophrenia, a severe and disabling mental disorder, affects about
      285,000 people in the UK. It is associated with a progressive course, poor
      social and occupational functioning, a high suicide rate, premature death
      from physical illness and high use of health services including in-patient
      beds. Medication is the preferred treatment but response is limited. Prior
      to the publication of research carried out by Professor Stephen Pilling
      and colleagues at UCL there was uncertainty about the effectiveness of
      psychological interventions. This work established the case for
      psychological interventions in NICE guidelines and psychological
      interventions for schizophrenia are now widely available and used in the
      NHS.
    
UnderpinningResearch

    Research undertaken by Pilling and colleagues published in 2002 [1]
      represents the first high quality systematic review and meta-analysis of a
      wide range of psychological interventions for schizophrenia, based solely
      on randomised controlled trials that had been robustly assessed for study
      quality. It, along with a sister paper from the same group [2],
      provided the first authoritative and comprehensive reviews of
      psychological interventions in schizophrenia. Crucially, they assessed the
      relative importance of different psychological interventions, identifying
      cognitive behavioural and family interventions as likely to bring
      benefits, whereas other interventions such as social skills training or
      cognitive remediation were shown to be less clinically effective.
    The comprehensive systematic review covered 8 trials of cognitive
      behaviour therapy (CBT) including 528 participants and 18 of family
      interventions including 1,467 participants. It examined the effectiveness
      of cognitive and behavioural interventions and family interventions
      against a range of comparators and was the first to properly characterise
      the nature and magnitude of the effect of psychological interventions in
      schizophrenia. The work considered a comprehensive range of outcomes
      including positive and negative symptomatology, relapse and remission,
      treatment compliance, the impact on families, suicidality and other harms,
      and personal and social functioning. Importantly the research pointed to
      possible differential effects of cognitive behavioural and family
      interventions in the treatment of schizophrenia.
    This underpinning research strongly suggested (and this was confirmed by
      subsequent research), that cognitive behavioural interventions were
      effective in reducing the severity of persistent psychotic symptoms that
      were unresponsive to medication whereas the impact of family intervention
      was more likely to be on the prevention of relapse.
    The work also provided information on the nature, duration, and intensity
      of the psychological interventions likely to be associated with positive
      outcomes. For example, it raised important questions about the possible
      detrimental effects of group-based approaches to family treatment (which
      were gaining popularity with clinical services at the time of the review).
      It clarified that the role of psychological interventions in the treatment
      of schizophrenia was most effective when combined with medication but did
      suggest that the likely impact of the interventions was not mediated
      simply by improved adherence to medication. Importantly, it also
      demonstrated that no significant associated harms were associated with
      either with cognitive behavioural or family interventions (concern had
      been expressed about increased suicidality for those patients in receipt
      of family interventions).
    The underpinning research also raised a number of specific questions
      about the future direction of research in addition to the modality of
      delivery of treatment, including the involvement of patients in family
      treatment, the sub-groups of those with schizophrenia who may benefit from
      treatment and, as noted above, the possible differential benefits of
      cognitive behavioural and family interventions. Finally, we developed a
      method for the analysis of a range of complex psychological interventions
      and its application to the formulation of clinical guidelines.
    