CaseStudyId: 36445
Title: 
    Alternatives to acute hospital admission in adult mental health
    

ImpactDetails

    The principal contribution of this programme of work has been to provide
      an evidence base for informed decision making at local and national policy
      levels regarding the configuration of acute services for severely mentally
      ill adults. Our work has been widely cited, and has contributed towards
      sustaining the crisis resolution/home treatment model beyond the initial
      period when it was mandatory national policy, and towards supporting the
      introduction of new residential crisis houses in the community. The
      benefits of a policy on acute mental health care that is well founded in
      evidence are considerable: the Information Centre for Health and Social
      Care estimates that acute inpatient wards cost &#163;655 million per year and
      crisis resolution teams &#163;256 million in England. Effective alternatives to
      acute admission represent significant cost savings to the NHS and
      furthermore improve an aspect of service provision that users frequently
      cite as one of the most important issues for them, and the one with which
      they are least satisfied.
    Guidance for Commissioners: The Joint Commissioning Panel
      for Mental Health, co-chaired by the Royal College of Psychiatrists and
      the Royal College of General Practitioners in collaboration with a range
      of national voluntary and statutory bodies, has produced recommendations
      on adult mental health services which are intended for use by Clinical
      Commissioning Groups to inform local commissioning priorities, strategies
      and service redesign; and for Health and Wellbeing Partnerships to inform
      Health and Wellbeing Strategies. Their guidance on services for severe
      problems in crisis cites our work in its recommendations that: crisis
      teams are an efficient way of managing mental health crises; that they can
      also be used in early psychosis; and that crisis houses are beneficial for
      a sub-group in crisis. Johnson was part of the expert group making these
      recommendations [a]. The NHS London commissioning programme also
      produces guidance on acute care models and cites our work in support of
      recommendations on crisis teams and crisis houses [b].
    NICE Guidelines: Our work is cited in guidelines on bipolar
      disorder, schizophrenia and service user experience. Bipolar disorder:
      our study is cited as the main evidence to support a recommendation that
      crisis teams be made available for people with bipolar disorder [c].
      Schizophrenia: the current (2009) guideline on schizophrenia cites
      our trial (paper 1) as evidence that crisis teams may reduce
      hospitalisation for people from Black and Minority Ethnic backgrounds as
      well as for White service users [d]. In the 2013 revision of the
      NICE guidelines, for which Johnson is on the Guideline Development Group,
      evidence on mental health teams has been reviewed in more detail, and our
      trial (paper 1) will be cited as the only recent evidence supporting the
      recommendation that crisis resolution teams be available for people with
      schizophrenia/psychosis. Our work on crisis houses (papers 4 and 5) is
      also discussed. This guideline is now at a late stage of drafting, for
      release in late 2013. Service user experience in adult mental health:
      cites our work on crisis houses to support a recommendation that these
      should be available as they are greatly preferred by service users [e].
    Reports by national voluntary sector bodies: Several recent
      reports by influential national bodies cite our work in support of their
      recommendations. The national mental health charity MIND has
      conducted a national enquiry into acute care and is conducting a
      subsequent report on acute care. The enquiry report cites our studies in
      support of its strong advocacy of the crisis house model. Subsequently
      Johnson and colleagues have collaborated with MIND on their acute care
      report: Johnson has appeared with MIND representatives to give evidence on
      acute care to the All Party Parliamentary Group on Mental Health. We have
      released to them early findings from our national survey on crisis teams
      in the CORE study and these have formed the basis of recent press releases
      and media coverage on acute care [f]. The Kings Fund has
      recently reported on ways of enhancing the productivity of mental health
      services. This major report cites four of our papers on crisis teams and
      crisis houses in support of recommendations that alternatives to admission
      need to be further developed in order to increase the efficiency and
      acceptability of mental health services [g]. The think tank Centre
        for Social Justice has also reported on mental health services
      nationally. It advocates reform of mental health service delivery, citing
      our work to support the recommendation for further development and
      implementation of the crisis team and crisis houses [h].
    International impact: A report by the World Psychiatric
      Association making recommendations for the development of community mental
      health services makes recommendations in support of crisis teams and
      crisis houses in countries with well-developed mental health systems [i].
      Our work is also cited in support of new national policies in documents
      from Norway and Flanders (Belgium), and in documents supporting local
      plans and policies within mental health Trusts. In Norway, for example,
      our work influenced recommendations for crisis resolution teams in Norway,
      developed by the Acute Network for the Norwegian Directorate of Health [j].
      Johnson has been asked to speak on crisis teams in relation to the
      introduction of new policies in Norway, Flanders, Scotland and Wales and
      is regularly contacted by service planners and clinicians from a variety
      of countries where this model has attracted interest.
    
ImpactSummary

    Alternatives to acute admission in mental health are crucial, not least
      because of the high cost of inpatient care. We have carried out a major
      research programme that includes the only randomised controlled evaluation
      of crisis resolution teams and the only major UK study of crisis houses,
      which are community-based, residential alternatives to hospital admission.
      This programme demonstrated the efficacy of community treatment and has
      significantly influenced decision making at a local and national policy
      level, including commissioning guidance and three sets of NICE guidelines.
      This has contributed to changes in the way acute services for severely
      mentally ill adults are configured in the NHS, and internationally.
    
UnderpinningResearch

    Psychiatric hospitals are still a prominent component of UK mental health
      systems despite the closure of large asylums: the Information Centre for
      Health and Social Care estimates that 550,000 of England's 1.6 million
      users of specialist services for people with severe mental health problems
      (such as schizophrenia or bipolar disorder) were admitted to hospital
      during the year from April 2012. The high associated costs (&#163;655 million
      for acute psychiatric wards for adults of working age in 2012/13), service
      users' reluctance to be admitted and reports of negative experiences in
      hospital, and doubts about the therapeutic quality of wards drive the
      quest for effective alternatives to admission. UCL has led nationally and
      internationally over the past decade on research on these. Led by
      Professor Sonia Johnson, we have researched both major current types of
      alternative: crisis resolution teams, which provide crisis assessment and
      intensive home treatment, and crisis houses, which provide a community
      residential alternative to admission.
    A national policy in the UK mandated the introduction of crisis teams
      in 2001. This was widely criticised for lack of evidence, as studies cited
      to support it were at least two decades old and conducted in a very
      different service context from the current NHS. Our research has provided
      the necessary underpinning for their continuing implementation and
      development in the NHS. Our initial study on crisis teams was a
      naturalistic investigation of the impact of their introduction [1].
      This was followed by a widely cited study that remains internationally the
      only randomised controlled trial of the crisis resolution team model in a
      deinstitutionalised service system [2] accompanied by a health
      economic study demonstrating cost-effectiveness [3].
    Subsequently Johnson has led a nationwide investigation of the impact on
      the workforce of working on acute wards and in crisis teams [4].
      Norway has now followed England in adopting crisis teams as a national
      model, and Johnson has participated in a multicentre study assessing the
      Norwegian implementation. Our programme of research on crisis teams
      continues through the CORE study (2011-16), funded by the National
      Institute for Health Research Programme Grants for Applied Research. The
      initial stage of this has involved a nationwide investigation of
      experiences of implementing the crisis team model and of how best practice
      may be achieved in these teams: we are now conducting a national pilot of
      a fidelity scale based on the resulting model of good practice.
    The second form of admission diversion we have investigated is the crisis
        house, which provides 24-hour support and treatment in a domestic,
      community-based setting. Despite a 50-year history and strong support from
      service users, evidence for effectiveness and potential role in the mental
      health care system was limited prior to the studies of the past 10 years
      in which UCL has participated, so that they featured little in mental
      health policy and guidance on service planning. Following an initial study
      of service user characteristics and experiences in a women's crisis house
      in North London, we have, in collaboration with colleagues at Kings
      College London, conducted the study that is now the main UK evidence
      source on residential alternatives to acute admission, the Alternatives
      Study [5, 6]. This demonstrated that crisis houses manage in the
      community a group that overlaps substantially with acute hospital ward
      populations, though with less risk to others in acute wards. We have also
      found that service users prefer crisis house care to inpatient admissions,
      and that it is associated with lower mean costs and similar subsequent
      readmission rates.
    