CaseStudyId: 36446
Title: 
    Adapting to the impacts of climate change on cultural heritage
    

ImpactDetails

    Perhaps the most significant impact of the research described in Section
      2, which underpins all others, is its vital contribution to creating a
      paradigm shift in how people &#8212; and particularly the heritage sector in the
      UK, Europe and the rest of the world &#8212; understand the risks of climate
      change to cultural heritage. Research by CSH was the first to highlight
      these risks and, in so doing, focused attention on both the impacts and
      the mitigation and adaptation strategies needed to safeguard cultural
      heritage from these threats. This research has above all informed
      international policy and for the first time brought to the attention of
      decision makers the potential of damage to cultural heritage across the
      globe from climate change.
    Research by CSH has thus had wide-reaching influence on international and
      national heritage policy, through UNESCO, the Council of Europe and
      English Heritage. Through this means, research has had an impact on many
      of the most important historic properties in the UK, Europe and globally.
      For instance, English Heritage lists 374,081 listed buildings or groups of
      buildings, 19,717 scheduled ancient monuments, 1,601 registered historic
      parks and gardens, 9,080 conservation areas and 17 World Heritage Sites.
      The UNESCO World Heritage List includes 725 cultural properties in 153
      countries. The management of a large proportion of these properties, and
      of listed buildings and World Heritage Sites in particular, is affected by
      the CSH's research findings. As a result, the focus of 'Heritage Counts
      2008', the annual survey of the state of England's historic environment
      produced by English Heritage (who had commissioned the original CHS
      research) on behalf of the Historic Environment Forum was on climate
      change [1].
    This CHS research [b, c] provided the vital evidence on the
      impacts of climate change for international groups involved with heritage
      conservation. Before then heritage managers focussed on average rather
      than extreme climate conditions affecting cultural heritage. This is
      demonstrated by the debate the research instantly occasioned, and its
      subsequent adoption in key international frameworks. For example, the
      Decision at the 31st Session of the UNESCO World Heritage Committee in
      Christchurch, 2007, requested `the World Heritage Centre and the
        Advisory Bodies to integrate policies and strategies established by the
        World Heritage Committee on the issue of climate change in the
        implementation of the strategy for risk reduction at World Heritage
        properties'. In 2008, UNESCO World Heritage Centre published a
      Policy Document on the Impacts of Climate Change on World Heritage
        Properties which referred to CSH research as 'a model for other
        regions of the world' [2; pp. 5-6]. Also in 2008, UNESCO's Management
        Plans for World Heritage Sites: A Practical Guide advised the
      inclusion of reference to climate change impacts: `International
        climate research has shown beyond doubt that climate change is both
        progressing and accelerating ... World Heritage is also affected. If
        effects are visible or feared, observations and counter measures should
        be described in the management plan' [2].
    These were implemented in management plans which took effect during the
      impact period, and UCL research expertise was deployed to support this.
      For example, the 2007 update of the Tower of London World Heritage
        Site Management Plan's Objective 7: Assess the risks to the Tower posed
        by climate change and review the options for mitigation of those effects,
      states that: `Historic Royal Palaces has begun a programme to assess
        the risks of climate change and review the options for mitigation of its
        effects. It is assisting the Centre for Sustainable Heritage, University
        College London, in developing a study to assess risk, and examine
        adaptive capacity.' [3; item 6.4.29].
    In 2008, the International Institute for Conservation of Historic and
      Artistic Works (IIC) also organised a roundtable discussion on `Climate
      Change and Museum Collections' at which this research [b, c] was
      presented as part of the panel of experts. This was the first time that
      awareness of climate change impacts on museum collections was recognised
      at an international level; until then, the focus had been mainly on the
      impacts on buildings and landscapes [4; p.2].
    This research also led the Council of Europe European and Mediterranean
      Major Hazards Agreement (EUR-OPA) to commission a report on the Vulnerability
        of Cultural Heritage to Climate Change (November 2008) followed by a
      workshop which produced a Draft Recommendation on the Vulnerability of
        Cultural Heritage to Climate Change [5]. This draft
      recommendation was approved at the 57th meeting of the Committee of
      Permanent Correspondents (European state parties) of the EUR-OPA Major
      Hazards Agreement (Dubrovnik, Croatia, 15-16 October 2009) [6].
      This agreement is an important platform for co-operation in the field of
      major natural and technological disasters between Europe and the south of
      the Mediterranean. Thus approval meant EU ministerial recognition of the
      risks posed to cultural heritage by climate change. Recognising the
      importance of incorporating this research into practice, the Council of
      Europe sponsored 7 European Master-Doctorate Courses and workshops between
      2007 and 2012, most of which took place within the census period. These
      courses, based on the EUR-OPA report [5] were attended by 152
      postgraduate students from 46 countries who chose to follow research
      careers or professional careers in the heritage sector. The course was
      co-designed by UCL researchers who based their teaching explicitly on
      research into wetting/drying of historic structures and into the
      adaptation strategies for historic buildings developed at UCL [7].
    In the UK, research has had a significant effect on understanding of the
      impact of climate change on cultural heritage. In Spring 2008, researchers
      were invited by English Heritage to contribute to its Conservation
        Bulletin: A Bulletin of the Historic Environment, which focused on
      the issue of `Adapting to a Changing Climate' [8]. As the leading
      opinion former in heritage circles, English Heritage's Conservation
        Bulletin is published twice a year and is circulated free of charge
      to more than 15,000 conservation specialists, planners, opinion-formers
      and decision-makers throughout the UK and abroad. By presenting research
      by CSH in order to spell out threats and opportunities, it shows how
      English Heritage recommends conservation in the context of climate change.
    The significance of CSH research, and its application to individual
      properties, is demonstrated by the use to which it has been put by
      heritage professionals. The research on the stresses caused by rapid
      drying [a] was conducted in partnership with an insurance company
      and a dehumidification company. Both benefitted commercially from the
      research in ways which exemplify the wider impacts on the sector. As
      indicated in Section 2, insurance companies typically advocate rapid
      drying after flooding so that a building can be brought back into use, a
      belief which was challenged by research. One partner, Ecclesiastical
      Insurance, specialises in heritage insurance in the UK, Ireland, Australia
      and Canada, with a turnover of &#163;497.7 million in 2012. This insurance
      company, in particular, received confirmation of what it had anecdotally
      believed to be the case: as their then Chief Surveyor reported, CSH
      research `provided the evidence Ecclesiastical Insurance needed to
        support its slow approach to drying of flood damaged historic building
        in order to reduce the risk of damage to the structure, fixtures and
        fittings from rapid drying' [9]. This confirmed that
      Ecclesiastical Insurance's advice to its property surveyors was correct
      and that rapid drying of flood damaged properties was to be avoided. The
      involvement in the research project of Historic Scotland's Brodick Castle
      and The National Trust's Blickling Hall, both of which were subject
      respectively to driving rain and flooding due to rainwater run-off, gave
      these two heritage organisations opportunities to further their knowledge
      on the impact of climate change, and in turn, fed into their improved
      management plans. For example, the National Trust has continued its
      scientific research on flooding effects at Blickling Hall, with UCL
      support [10].
    
ImpactSummary

    UCL research by Cassar et al has provided the vital evidence to occasion
      a culture change in how heritage professionals nationally and
      internationally approach adaptation to climate change for historic
      properties. Beneficiaries have included UNESCO, EU-ROPA and English
      Heritage. This has been instrumental in ensuring that climate change
      effects are an intrinsic part of management plans for historic sites,
      commissioned training and research, and improved the advice provided by
      commercial organisations in the heritage sector.
    
UnderpinningResearch

    The tension between drying flooded historic wooden structures and their
      conservation has been the subject of long debate. Views have been
      polarised around whether rapid drying to bring buildings back into use
      quickly for economic, health and social reasons would have the unintended
      consequence of long term damage. Research by the Centre for Sustainable
      Heritage (CSH) at the UCL Bartlett Faculty of the Built Environment
      specifically addresses the issue that climate change is predicted to
      increase damage to fragile structures as a result of increased flooding
      and fabric saturation, and has demonstrated the effect of forced drying on
      saturated wooden buildings. While it has been known for a long time that
      drying wooden structures too quickly can cause physical stress to the
      fabric, our modelling illustrated how dangerous moisture gradients
      develop.
    Between 2002-03, CSH carried out a scoping study on Climate Change
        and the Historic Environment for English Heritage. This captured,
      for the first time, the observations of heritage managers on the impact of
      climate change on buried archaeology, historic buildings, parks and
      gardens. This was the prelude to two major collaborative projects.
    EPSRC-funded research (2003-06) was driven by the need to understand the
      behaviour of water saturated building fabrics. Conservation advice for the
      drying out of historic buildings was that this process should be carried
      out slowly to avoid hygrothermal stresses in the building fabric. However,
      there is pressure from owners and insurers to dry out buildings rapidly so
      that they can be quickly brought back into use and to restore conditions
      unfavourable to the recurrence of wetting. The research determined the
      stresses in the historic fabric caused by rapid drying compared to the
      extent of related damage such as salt efflorescence that occurs due to
      slow drying. The research modelled the hygrothermal performance of
      historic building fabrics and a Stakeholders Dissemination and Scientific
      Research Report was published [a].
    This was followed by a project funded by the European Commission
      (2004-07) and driven by the need to predict and describe the effects of
      climate change on Europe's built cultural heritage over the next 100
      years, and to develop mitigation and adaptation strategies for the
      historic buildings, sites, monuments and materials likely to be worst
      affected. A Vulnerability Atlas and Adaptation Guidelines for
      heritage managers were produced to enable visualisation of the built
      heritage and cultural landscape under future climate scenarios and to
      model the effects of different adaptation strategies. CSH was responsible
      for modelling the drying of flooded historic wooden buildings under
      different climate scenarios. These research results were published in a
      conference book [b], and in three thematic pages on wetting and
      drying of wood, brick and sandstone in 2010 in The Atlas of Climate
        Change Impact on European Heritage [c]. CSH was also
      responsible for editing and authoring parts of the Adaptation Guidelines
      to support the interpretation of this atlas. The project was conducted in
      collaboration with the Institute for Atmospheric Sciences and Climate
      (Sabbioni, C.; Italian National Research Council) and the School of
      Environmental Sciences (Brimblecombe, P.; University of East Anglia). CSH
      research focused on the impact of climate change on indoor-outdoor
      interactions through the building fabric and on the indoor historic
      environment, while partner teams focused on outdoor heritage.
    UCL researchers in CSH during the time of the underpinning research were:
      Nigel Blades (Lecturer), Phill Biddulph (Research Fellow), May Cassar
      (Professor), Theo Chen (Research Fellow), Robyn Pender (Research Fellow),
      Ian Ridley (Senior Lecturer), Matija Strlic (Senior Lecturer) and Joel
      Taylor (Lecturer).
    