CaseStudyId: 36485
Title: 
    Contributing to a healthy, low-carbon built environment
    

ImpactDetails

    The health and wider aspects of low-carbon built environments now feature
      prominently on political agendas across the world, and the health and
      energy research by CBES as outlined above has made a major contribution to
      this state of affairs. It has had direct and significant impacts on the
      development and revision of guidance, regulation, and policy at regional,
      national and international levels. This influence has assured subsequent
      impacts from regional to global levels on the ways in which buildings are
      currently constructed or are likely to be refurbished, and, in turn, on
      improvements in human health and wellbeing across the UK and around the
      world.
    Impacts on regional policy:
    CBES work has informed key Greater London Authority (GLA) guidance
      relating to Urban Heat Islands (UHI), specifically as noted in terms of
      measures to minimise summer cooling energy demand and health risks, whilst
      retaining lower winter heating demands and decreased winter health risks
      due to reduced exposure to cold. In response, the GLA drew upon UCL's
      research to help produce its key policy document Managing Risks and
        Increasing Resilience &#8212; The Mayor's Climate Change Adaptation Strategy
      (2011), which details plans to tackle overheating in London [1].
      The research has particularly supported the development by the GLA of
      better evidenced-based policies and programmes to optimise its mix of
      adaptation and mitigation measures, and to target limited funding as
      effectively as possible [2].
    Shaping national policy and practice:
    CBES research into relative humidity and related growth of mould in
    dwellings has catalysed and informed important changes in the Building
    Regulations for England and Wales. In 2010, it resulted in amendments to the
    moisture criteria guidelines (ADF 2010) for the control of mould growth in
    dwellings [3]. Fundamental changes were made to the existing
    guidance, in line with CBES's own research recommendation for its amendment.
    Those changes included responses to more specific recommendations such as
    the need to recognise and respond appropriately to the transient nature of
    mould growth. The research provided policy makers with novel recommendations
    about the daily, weekly and monthly maximum average levels of relative
    humidity that should be permissible in dwellings. Changes to ADF 2010 have
    had a significant impacts on the UK construction industry and, thereby, on
    the UK population as a whole. Every dwelling constructed in England and
    Wales since 2010 has been subject to ADF 2010; from 2011 to 2012, this
    amounted to more than 230,000 households. Following the guidance improves
    the safety of dwellings and allows house builders to demonstrate the legal
    requirement for compliance with the Building Regulations.
    Elsewhere, the research on UHIs (supplemented by further advice from the
      CBES team) is informing the development by the Chartered Institution of
      Building Services Engineers (CIBSE) of UHI guidance which will be included
      in the 8th edition of their Environmental Guide A [4].
      This important guide, which is currently undergoing substantial revision
      and is due for release in 2014, will provide a primary reference source
      for the 19,000+ members of CIBSE.
    CBES research has also been used to develop new evaluation tools
      informing further developments in policy and guidance. From 2011,
      modelling techniques developed over the years by CBES were used in
      collaboration with colleagues from LSHTM to develop the novel `Health
      Impacts of Domestic Energy Efficiency Measures' (HIDEEM) tool for the UK
      Department of Energy and Climate Change (DECC). This included the
      construction of micro-environmental stock models to quantify indoor
      environmental conditions and monetise the health impact associated with
      energy efficiency changes in houses in Great Britain. These CBES methods
      employed, for example, empirically derived relationships between house
      temperatures and measures of energy efficiency, as well as physics based
      models of pollutant concentrations. HIDEEM informs analyses of the cost
      effectiveness of relevant policies by evaluating and monetising the health
      impacts of the large-scale implementation of low energy interventions
      within dwellings. Since its release in 2012, HIDEEM has been used by
      DECC's Energy Efficiency Deployment Office (EEDO) to generate health
      monetisation inputs to its 2012 Energy Efficiency Strategy. This, the
      first in a series of documents to support the delivery of DECC's energy
      efficiency policies, relates to and suggests ways to maximise energy
      efficiency potential across the UK economy. Here, the HIDEEM tool was used
      specifically to monetise the health impact of wall insulation measures: `DECC
        modelling of the impact of the installation of solid wall insulation in
        all properties in England gives a total improvement in the health of
        those individuals in the properties of &#163;3.5bn-&#163;5.0bn over the lifetime
        of the measures'. The report further notes the potentially
      significant benefits of such increases in energy efficiency to wellbeing:
      `a higher disposable income, as a result of lower energy bills, can
        allow increased spending on other necessities. In addition, the health
        benefits from properly installed energy efficiency measures can be
        significant' [5]. DECC has also used the tool to support its
      2013 Fuel Poverty Framework. That document notes that modelling work
      carried out using HIDEEM suggests "substantial health-related costs
        associated with cold homes". The influence of that work on the
      policies set out here is evident as the report continues: `For this
        reason, we believe that we should continue to prioritise vulnerable fuel
        poor households for support. In addition, we will continue to build the
        evidence base on health impacts' [6].
    International impacts: The reach of these research impacts on
      construction and human health has been very considerably extended by the
      further influence of the relative humidity research on international
      guidelines. In 2008, CBES was invited to provide expert advice to the
      World Health Organisation (WHO) on best practice in, and the international
      regulatory framework for, humidity and mould growth. CBES drew on its
      research work to supply that advice via contributions to two expert
      meeting reports. These resulted in the publication in 2010 of important
      new WHO mould guidance documents. This guidance `provides
        policy-related recommendations and identifies potential ways for
        international, national and local authorities to prevent, reduce or
        mitigate exposure to dampness and mould' &#8212; all in order to
        `enable policy-makers to identify appropriate measures to support and
        advocate in the field of public health protection and ... provide them
        with relevant examples and guidance for policy and regulatory measures'
      [7].
    More broadly, CBES work has contributed to a fundamental shift in the
      awareness and understanding among international policy-makers of the
      possible co-impacts of carbon mitigation measures. Its research
      elucidating the health impacts of housing energy efficiency interventions
      [d] has particularly profoundly influenced international awareness
      of and engagement with the issues it raised. The significance and reach of
      that influence was demonstrated in statements of support made by the UN
      Secretary-General Ban Ki-Moon, WHO Director Margaret Chan, and US
      Department of Health and Human Services Secretary Kathleen Sebelius, all
      of whom acknowledged the global significance of the research project to
      which CBES [d] made a substantial contribution at the launch of
      its findings in December 2009 [8].
    The expert knowledge of CBES researchers of the specific health impacts
      of carbon mitigation measures is now being combined with their wider
      expertise about the impacts of decarbonisation on factors other than
      health [e]. This combined expertise led, in 2013, to an invitation
      by the International Energy Agency (IEA) to deliver expert input
      (alongside DECC) to its `Capturing the Multiple Benefits of Energy
      Efficiency' initiative. That key input from CBES, which related both
      specifically to the HIDEEM tool and to wider aspects of the unintended
      consequences of decarbonisation, has now supported the development of a
      key IEA Handbook [9].
    
ImpactSummary

    Research conducted by Davies et al within the UCL Bartlett's Complex
      Built Environment Systems (CBES) group on built environment choices and
      their implications &#8212; particularly for energy use and health &#8212; has
      contributed to a fundamental shift in global understanding of the possible
      health impacts of carbon mitigation measures, and has informed key policy
      formulation relating to this. At regional and national levels, research by
      CBES has informed London's Climate Change Adaptation Strategy, and led to
      changes in the Building Regulations for England and Wales, and produced a
      tool used by the UK Department of Energy and Climate Change to inform
      aspects of its Energy Efficiency Strategy. The international impacts of
      CBES arise both from its broad influence on policy-makers' awareness and
      understanding of the implications of energy efficiency policies, and from
      more specific contributions to the development of World Health
      Organisation guidance.
    
UnderpinningResearch

    The case for taking action to tackle climate change is now persuasive,
      and it is high-income countries that must reduce greenhouse gas emissions
      the most. For around a decade, this issue has been the focus of work
      conducted through a series of funded research projects in the Bartlett's
      EPSRC Platform-funded Complex Built Environment Systems (CBES) group now
      led by Professor Mike Davies (who joined UCL in 2004). That group aims
      particularly to improve understanding of the physical performance of built
      environment choices and their implications for energy use, health,
      conservation, productivity and climate change. CBES is primarily
      interested in developing solutions to the practical problems of designing,
      constructing, and managing appropriate environments within and around the
      built environment, and has been at the forefront of vital work associated
      with the decarbonisation of housing stock. It has demonstrated the
      potential for such large-scale programmes to produce unintended detriments
      to health, but also substantial co-benefits. The research outlined here is
      unified by its shared emphasis on establishing appropriate methods to
      recognise and minimise the former whilst maximising the latter to produce
      a simultaneously low-carbon and healthy built environment.
    Work at CBES on the control of relative humidity in dwellings and the
      growth of mould through appropriate ventilation responds to tension
      between the need to maximise ventilation rates in order to reduce
      the risk of mould growth, and the desire to minimise such airflows
      in order to reduce energy use/carbon emissions. Work commissioned by the
      Department of Communities and Local Government (DCLG) in 2005 to address
      the issue of preventing damaging mould growth in dwellings via appropriate
      ventilation involved a combination of laboratory, modelling and fieldwork.
      The research demonstrated the need to amend ventilation guidance in the
      then current Building Regulations, which did not, for example, address the
      critical importance of the transient nature of mould growth in the most
      appropriate manner. These and other important research findings were
      published in outputs offering new recommendations to policy makers for the
      daily, weekly and monthly maximum average levels of relative humidity that
      should be permissible in dwellings [a].
    A second, related strand of CBES work has focussed on the health impacts
      of Urban Heat Islands (UHIs) and overheating in dwellings. Responding to
      the identification by the EPSRC of a key knowledge gap, the investigations
      by CBES have particularly focused since 2007 on UHIs within London. This
      work has produced new guidance on the measures that can be used to reduce
      negative aspects of UHIs (increased summer cooling energy demand and
      increased summer health risks due to overheating) whilst retaining their
      beneficial effects (decreased winter heating demand and decreased winter
      health risks due to reduced exposure to cold). This landmark body of
      research also studied factors influencing overheating in dwellings and
      provided guidance relating (amongst others) to: the relative importance of
      the location of a dwelling in the UHI versus its intrinsic thermal
      properties; and the impact of interventions on overheating in dwellings [b,
        c].
    Ground-breaking work conducted since 2009 expanded the remit of the CBES
      research to a wider treatment of the issue of projected climate change and
      the impact of energy efficiency interventions in dwellings on exposure to
      cold, heat and a range of pollutants such as radon, particulates and
      environmental tobacco smoke. The results were used in a collaborative team
      led by Professor Paul Wilkinson of the London School of Hygiene and
      Tropical Medicine (LSHTM) to extend the findings of CBES research to the
      effects of such exposure on health [d]. Further work has also
      dealt with a wider consideration of the possible unintended consequences
      of decarbonisation policies [e]. This pioneering holistic approach
      allowed the team to demonstrate both the dangers of inappropriate policy
      formulation and implementation, and also the very significant potential
      co-benefits.
    CBES researchers involved in UCL research include: Hector
      Altamirano-Medina (Lecturer), Mark Barrett (Senior Lecturer), Phillip
      Biddulph (Senior Research Associate), Ben Croxford (Senior Lecturer),
      Payel Das (Research Associate), Mike Davies (Professor), Steve Evans (RA),
      Bob Lowe (Professor), Ian Hamilton (Lecturer), Alex Macmillan (SRA), Anna
      Mavrogianni (Lecturer), Dejan Mumovic (Senior Lecturer), Eleni Oikonomou
      (RA), Tadj Oreszczyn (Professor), Ian Ridley (Senior Lecturer), Clive
      Shrubsole (RA), Philip Steadman (Professor) and Marcella Ucci (Lecturer).
    