CaseStudyId: 36496
Title: 
    Development of new guidelines for antibiotic prophylaxis for dental
      procedures in patients at risk of infective endocarditis
    

ImpactDetails

    The research described above provided substantial evidence to challenge
      the existing guidelines on antibiotic prophylaxis (typically in the UK 3g
      of amoxicillin or 600mg of clindamycin) prior to a relevant procedure).
      Roberts was co-opted onto the NICE Guideline Development Group as adviser
      on this topic. In 2008, NICE issued Clinical Guideline 64, Prophylaxis
      against infective endocarditis [a]. The work of the Roberts
      group was influential in this document and 7 papers were cited at 16
      points throughout the document. The guidelines recommended that antibiotic
      prophylaxis used solely to prevent IE should not be given to people at
      risk of IE undergoing dental and non-dental procedures. Four points were
      highlighted that underpinned this recommendation and work by the Roberts
      group was used to support 3 of these:
    
      there is no consistent association between having an interventional
        procedure, dental or non-dental, and the development of IE (cites
        reference [1])
      regular tooth brushing almost certainly presents a greater risk of IE
        than a single dental procedure because of repetitive exposure to
        bacteraemia with oral flora (cites references [5] and [6])
      the clinical effectiveness of antibiotic prophylaxis is not proven
        (cites reference [7])
      antibiotic prophylaxis against IE for dental procedures may lead to a
        greater number of deaths through fatal anaphylaxis than a strategy of no
        antibiotic prophylaxis, and is not cost effective.
    
    As a consequence of the NICE guidelines, there has been a demonstrable
      change in clinical practice, with a resulting decrease in antibiotic
      prescribing for dental procedures and infective endocarditis. A review in
      2011 revealed that prescriptions in England reduced by 79% in the two
      years after guidelines were issued with no increase in the rate of
      infective endocarditis [b]. A review of dental prescribing in
      Wales also reported that dental prescriptions for amoxicillin 3g sachets
      and clindamycin capsules decreased sharply after the publication of the
      NICE guidelines in 2008 [c]. Overall this represents a reduction
      of over half a million doses over a five-year period for the two
      countries. The reduction of unnecessary antibiotic prescribing has three
      key impacts: (i) improved patient safety through reduced adverse reactions
      to antibiotics; (ii) a cost-saving to the NHS through lower wastage; (iii)
      a reduction in antibiotic use helping to prevent an increase in antibiotic
      resistance in the community.
    Improved patient safety: The guidelines discuss anaphylaxis as one
      of the reasons for their recommendation. It has been estimated that
      approximately 20 individuals per million patients who receive a dose of
      penicillin suffer a fatal anaphylactic reaction [d]. Approximately
      500,000 doses have been avoided and an estimated 10 lives likely to have
      been saved and countless episodes of anaphylaxis avoided (in the UK
      alone).
    Cost-savings to the NHS: Prior to the guidelines, approximately
      129,000 doses were prescribed per year and this reduced to 27,504 doses
      per year in the two years after the guidelines were issued. This
      represents a reduction of over half a million doses over the five years
      and a consequent saving of approximately &#163;4m in prescription fees
      (calculated from data in [b]).
    A reduction in antibiotic use: As detailed above, approximately
      500,000 fewer doses of antibiotics were prescribed to patients in the
      period. The inappropriate and overuse of antibiotics in the past has
      provided an extremely strong selective pressure for bacteria to evolve and
      acquire a myriad of different resistance mechanisms. As highlighted by the
      Chief Medical Officer of England, bacterial resistance to antimicrobials
      now represents one of the most urgent problems facing public health and
      modern healthcare. Once antibiotics become ineffective, increases in
      morbidity and premature mortality will follow.
    Changes in international guidelines: The research described above
      has also had an impact on guidelines around the world, which have been
      reviewed and modified using evidence generated by the UCL EDI team.
      Roberts was acknowledged as an international expert by the American Heart
      Association in 2007 prior to his work with NICE and six papers by the
      Roberts group were used to support their recommendations. The research
      also informed the 2008 American Academy of Pediatric Dentistry guidelines
      for antibiotic prophylaxis for dental patients at risk of infection [e]
      and the 2009 European Society of Cardiology Guidelines on the prevention,
      diagnosis, and treatment of infective endocarditis [f] leading to
      a change in their clinical recommendations. Other international bodies
      have used the above guidelines to inform their own national
      recommendations. For example, in Australia, national guidelines twice
      reference work by Roberts and colleagues [g].
    
ImpactSummary

    Infective endocarditis (IE) is a rare but life-threatening disorder that
      may arise as a consequence of bacteraemia following invasive procedures
      such as those of dentistry. Research at the UCL Eastman Dental Institute
      has detailed the dental causes, prevalence and character of bacteraemia
      following dental procedures and demonstrated that everyday oral health
      activities are more likely to be a cause of bacteraemia than invasive
      dentistry. The research outcomes informed 2008 NICE guidelines that
      recommended that antibiotic prophylaxis solely to prevent IE should not be
      given to people at risk of IE undergoing dental and non-dental procedures.
      This has since caused a 78.6% fall in related antibiotic prescribing, a
      cost-saving of approximately &#163;4m to the NHS in England and will reduce the
      threats of fatal anaphylaxis and antibiotic resistance.
    
UnderpinningResearch

    Infective endocarditis (IE) is a rare disorder but with significant
      morbidity and mortality. Oral streptococci may cause approximately 48% of
      confirmed cases of endocarditis. Until 2008, it was standard practice to
      give antibiotic prophylaxis to at-risk patients prior to certain dental
      procedures to reduce the risk of IE. The number of patients affected was
      approximately 130,000 per year. However, there was no strong evidence to
      support this practice, and some researchers questioned its effectiveness.
      This uncertainty led to a programme of research at the UCL Eastman Dental
      Institute (UCL EDI) to understand the processes involved.
    A review by Roberts [1] concluded that everyday procedures such
      as clenching and tooth-cleaning are more likely to cause IE than single
      invasive dental procedures and that the benefit of antibiotic prophylaxis
      prior to dental treatment was questionable.
    Roberts, Lucas, Spratt and Wilson thus undertook a programme of work from
      the late 1990s onwards to understand the events that lead to bacteraemia
      and to determine its prevalence and intensity. They established that
      simple dental procedures (rubber dam placement, use of fast or slow
      drills, placement of simple restorations and orthodontic therapy) induced
      bacteraemia [2, 3, 4]. A study subsequently demonstrated that
      bacteraemia was as likely to develop as a consequence of tooth brushing at
      home as from cleaning or scaling by a dental professional [5];
      indeed tooth-brushing was found to be an important factor in cumulative
      dental bacteraemia and that over one year, bacteraemia due to
      tooth-brushing was many millions of times greater than a single dental
      extraction [6]. A later study of a cohort of 500 children to
      determine the duration, prevalence and intensity of bacteraemia following
      dental extractions demonstrated that bacteraemia could be detected after
      10 seconds and up to about 11 minutes following extraction and that a rich
      microbiota was present in blood with 42 different taxa being
      characterised.
    Roberts subsequently co-authored a Cochrane review on antibiotics for the
      prophylaxis of bacterial endocarditis in dentistry [7] in which it
      was concluded that there was no evidence as to whether penicillin
      prophylaxis is effective or ineffective against bacterial endocarditis in
      people at risk of endocarditis who are about to undergo an invasive dental
      procedure. Indeed the review demonstrated that there was a lack of
      evidence to support the previously published guidelines.
    The experimental evidence of the Eastman group and the literature review
      subsequently served to underpin the development of NICE guidelines for the
      use of antibiotic prophylaxis for invasive dental (and other) procedures.
    Researchers at UCL EDI who contributed to this work included: Professor
      Graham Roberts (Head of Paediatric Dentistry); Dr Victoria Lucas (Senior
      Clinical Lecturer); Professor Mike Wilson (Head of Microbiology); Dr David
      Spratt (Reader in Microbial Ecology); Ruth Holt (Senior Lecturer); Dr
      Aviva Petrie (Senior Lecturer in Statistics); Roger Davis (Consultant and
      Honorary Senior Lecturer in Special Care Dentistry).
    