CaseStudyId: 36506
Title: 
    Molecular genetic characterisation of human and animal disorders leading
      to
      improved diagnosis, prevention and treatment of inherited disorders
    

ImpactDetails

    Impacts on human health: As a result of the underpinning research
      described above, genetic
      testing for startle disease genes identified in our research studies is
      now offered by the Center for
      Genomics and Transcriptomics (CeGaT), Leiden University Medical Center and
      GENDIA (for
      GENetic DIAgnostic Network), an international network consisting of more
      than 100 laboratories
      located in the USA, Europe, Asia and Australia [a]. In the course
      of our research programme, 77
      individuals with startle disease have received a definitive genetic
      diagnosis from 634 screens of
      index patients through multiple candidate genes.
    Definitive genetic diagnosis allows improved clinical management of the
      condition, improved
      patient outcomes and reduction of risk. For example, genetic changes in
      the GlyT2 gene cause
      severe breathing problems during early infancy. With a definitive genetic
      diagnosis, parents are
      now being trained in effective resuscitation techniques and provided with
      heart rate and breathing
      monitors. For example, the charity Action Medical Research highlight the
      case of one child with
      startle disease: "since the diagnosis the entire family has been
        educated about startle disease so
        that they're all equipped to deal with a seizure and give her the
        medication she needs. They also
        know how to give cardiopulmonary resuscitation in case of an emergency
        following an apnoea
        attack" [b]. Children with GlyT2 and GlyR 03b2 subunit gene
      mutations also appear to have recurrent
      infantile apnoea episodes, developmental delay and a mild to severe delay
      in speech acquisition.
      Knowing the genetic causes of illness enables clinicians to predict more
      accurately what sort of
      educational needs they are likely to have in the future, thus helping
      parents gain access to
      appropriate support services.
    Harvey has also undertaken public engagement work on this topic, giving a
      total of 25 invited
      lectures/seminars on startle disease during the period 2008-13 to
      audiences in Austria, Belgium,
      France, Germany, Italy, Spain, Switzerland, the Netherlands, UK and USA.
      He has also spoken on
      startle disease at a Caf&#233; Scientifique event for members of the public. He
      has also increased
      awareness of startle disease via media work [c].
    Overall, our work into startle disease has led to significant changes in
      the way that the condition is
      understood, detected and diagnosed. Furthermore, based on a deep
      understanding of the genetic
      basis of the disease, our work has clearly indicated that clonazepam is
      the treatment of choice,
      which is again of significant use for clinicians treating this disorder.
    Impacts for cattle farming: Startle disease in cattle (also known
      as CMD2, or congenital
      muscular dystonia type 2) is lethal within days after an animal's birth.
      Discovery of the causative
      mutation led to the implementation of genetic testing for startle disease
      in Belgian Blue cattle,
      which has led to healthier animal populations and economic benefits to
      farmers. The British Blue
      Cattle Society report that as a result of our work, they brought into
      place new policies from 1
      January 2013, requiring all artificial insemination sires to be tested for
      genetic details, and that the
      results of these tests should be displayed on the society's website [d].
      An educational programme
      was also instigated to inform the society's membership about the
      importance of identifying genetic
      defects and restricting breeding of such animals. To April 2013, 521
      cattle had been tested, and of
      these 12 were found to be carriers. The introduction of this genetic test
      has had an immediate
      impact for cattle breeders with cattle affected by CMD2 [e], and
      has reduced the frequency of
      carriers in the population, enabling the breed to become healthier.
    There are also commercial benefits for farmers in terms of reduced
      economic impacts. In a 2011
      investigation on behalf of the Animal Health and Veterinary Laboratories
      Agency (AHVLA), we
      identified six CMD2 carriers and two affected animals on a single UK farm
      as well as several
      animals `in calf' that could produce carriers or affected calves [e].
      The direct impact of the loss of
      the carrier bull to the pedigree market, the death of two affected calves
      and loss of market value for
      other calves was estimated to be &#163;17,500 in this case alone. Losses would
      have been ongoing
      without our intervention and guidance on future breeding strategies, since
      carriers of this disorder
      are phenotypically normal and impossible to identity by visual inspection
      [f].
    Impacts on dog breeding: Disorders that resemble startle disease
      have also been reported in
      several dog breeds, although the incidence was unknown. Following our work
      to resolve the
      genetic basis of startle disease in Irish Wolfhounds and Episodic Falling
      Syndrome in Cavalier King
      Charles Spaniels, benefits to the University and animal breeders/owners
      were secured by the
      patenting [g] and commercial licencing of DNA diagnostic tests
      which are currently available via
      Laboklin [h]. These tests have enabled dog breeders to avoid `at
      risk' matings, or eliminate these
      disorders by using non-carrier dogs for future breeding. For example, in
      2011 we identified two
      affected Irish Wolfhounds and 13 carriers of a GlyT2 gene mutation,
      enabling a US breeder to
      eliminate startle disease within one generation. This intervention was
      described by the breeder as
      having saved her "from ruin". The importance of the new genetic
      test was also highlighted: "With
        your hard work in coming up with a viable test for us, we will know what
        paths to take and which
        paths lead to disaster" [i]. The diagnostic test for startle
      disease was described by the Secretary of
      the Irish Wolfhound Foundation as "the first clinically useful test for
        a genetic disease in our breed"
      [j]. Wider testing of a Cavalier King Charles spaniels by Laboklin
      has also revealed that Episodic
      Falling Syndrome is much more common than previously anticipated. In the
      2012-13 period,
      Laboklin have tested 440 dog DNA samples, revealing 38 affected animals
      and 139 carriers [h].
    
ImpactSummary

    Research at the UCL School of Pharmacy has positively influenced
      healthcare in startle
      disease/hyperekplexia, a rare disease that affects humans and several
      animal species, including
      dogs, horses and cattle. The identification and functional
      characterisation of mutations in genes
      involved in human startle disease by researchers at the School has
      improved genetic diagnostics
      and patient care. Our research on startle disease in cattle and dogs has
      also led to new non-
      invasive diagnostic tests that have alleviated animal suffering and
      reduced negative economic
      impacts on farmers. Overall, our findings have been translated into
      tangible benefits for the human
      and animal populations affected by this disease and have changed the way
      in which the disease is
      diagnosed and treated. We have also significantly increased the awareness
      of this rare disorder by
      communicating with academics, healthcare and veterinary professionals, and
      the general public.
    
UnderpinningResearch

    Startle disease is a rare but potentially fatal neurological disorder
      (estimated &lt;1,000 human cases
      total worldwide) characterised by an exaggerated startle reflex and muscle
      stiffness in response to
      tactile, acoustic or visual stimuli. This condition can cause infant death
      due to difficulties with
      breathing, aspiration pneumonia or severe bradycardia. Startle disease
      also occurs in livestock
      (cattle, horses) and dogs, with fatal consequences and significantly
      higher prevalence.
    Impacts reported here result from genetics research and
      structure/function assays of glycine
      receptor and transporter function in startle disease undertaken from
      2003-13 at the UCL School of
      Pharmacy by Robert J Harvey (Professor of Molecular Neuroscience and
      Genetics), Kirsten
      Harvey (Professor of Molecular Neuroscience and Cell Biology) and Brian R
      Pearce (Senior
      Lecturer in Pharmacology). These PIs either led research consortia or
      played critical roles within
      them. Key external collaborators included Professor Mark I Rees
      (University of Swansea) for
      human hyperekplexia, Michel George (University of Li&#232;ge, Belgium), John
      Woolliams (Roslin
      Institute) for bovine startle disease and Diane Shelton (University of San
      Diego, USA) for canine
      startle disease.
    In human startle disease, we characterised genetic, structural and
      functional defects in three genes
      encoding proteins involved in inhibitory glycinergic transmission:
      postsynaptic glycine receptor
      (GlyR) &#945;1 and 03b2 subunits and a presynaptic Na+/Cl--dependent
      glycine transporter (GlyT2). For the
      GlyR &#945;1 and 03b2 subunit genes (GLRA1 and GLRB) we provided
      a genetic diagnosis for 44 cases of
      startle disease, and revealed that recessive mutations in these genes are
      more common than
      dominant mutations. We also revealed new pathogenic mechanisms affecting
      glycine receptors
      that are important to the understanding of other channelopathies [1].
      For example, certain
      mutations in the GlyR &#945;1 and 03b2 subunit genes result in GlyRs that open
      spontaneously in the
      absence of agonist [1, 2]. For GlyT2, we provided a genetic
      diagnosis for 20 cases, revealing new
      dominant and recessive mutations. New pathogenic mechanisms identified
      included splice-site
      mutations and missense mutations affecting residues implicated in Cl-
      binding, conformational
      changes mediated by extracellular loop 4 and cation-03c0 interactions [3,
        4]. Importantly, we have
      also determined that low-dose clonazepam, a benzodiazepine that
      potentiates inhibitory GABAA
      receptor function, is therapeutically effective in children with either
      GlyR or GlyT2 mutations [1-4].
    In Belgian Blue cattle, novel whole-genome association techniques
      revealed that a missense
      mutation (L270P) in the GlyT2 gene (SLC6A5) causes congenital
      muscular dystonia type 2
      (CMD2), which is highly reminiscent of startle disease in humans. Calves
      with CMD2 show muscle
      stiffness and tremor following acoustic, tactile or visual stimulation and
      die shortly after birth due to
      respiratory difficulties. We conducted key functional tests that revealed
      that glycine uptake by
      GlyT2 in recombinant systems was abolished by the L270P mutation [5].
    We resolved the genetic basis of two canine disorders - startle disease
      in Irish Wolfhounds [6] and
      Episodic Falling Syndrome in Cavalier King Charles Spaniels, considered to
      be a form of startle
      disease by many veterinarians [7]. In a litter of Irish Wolfhounds
      with muscle stiffness and tremor
      in response to handling, along with severe breathing difficulties,
      sequencing of GLRA1 and GLRB
      did not reveal any pathogenic mutations. However, analysis of SLC6A5
      revealed a microdeletion
      encompassing exons 2 and 3 in both affected dogs. This results in the loss
      of part of the large
      cytoplasmic N-terminus of GlyT2 and all subsequent transmembrane domains
      due to a frameshift.
      By contrast, we found that Episodic Falling Syndrome is caused by a
      microdeletion in a different
      gene (BCAN), encoding a neuronal extracellular matrix protein known
      as brevican [7].
    R Harvey's initial work with the Irish Wolfhound Foundation led to
      further grant funding to screen
      the &gt;400 DNA samples in the Irish Wolfhound DNA bank, in order to
      obtain an estimate of the
      population frequency of this new disease gene variant. We detected a
      frequency of carrier animals
      of 2%, i.e. 1 carrier for every 50 dogs in the archive, demonstrating that
      in Irish Wolfhounds startle
      disease is an issue of significant concern. Wider testing of a larger
      population of Cavalier King
      Charles Spaniels without a history of Episodic Falling Syndrome in our
      research study also
      revealed that carriers were extremely common - 12.9% of dogs tested.
    