CaseStudyId: 36504
Title: 
    Infrastructure governance and planning for the urban poor in the
          Global South
    

ImpactDetails

    Research into urban infrastructure at the DPU connects theoretical and
      policy discourses with action. It creates practical tools and
      methodologies to support development practice, designing and delivering
      training curricula for practitioners in urban infrastructure services, and
      providing expert advice for institutions and governments. This research
      has helped to reframe the debate on urban infrastructure among planners
      and policy-makers, and DPU researchers have also been able to support the
      development of improved approaches to the planning and management of
      infrastructure in major cities in Sub-Saharan Africa and Latin America.
    DPU research on the governance of water and sanitation services has
      influenced NGO partners to change their programmes and project strategies.
      On the basis of earlier research [a], Allen was invited to act in
      the aforementioned advisory capacity for WaterAid and Building
        Partnerships for Development in Water and Sanitation (BPD) in small
      towns in six African and Asian countries from 2009-10. This project
      brought both WaterAid and BPD `significantly further in [their]
        understanding of the approaches necessary to tackle the issues of water
        and sanitation services in small towns' [1; p. 32], and
      defined the areas for `action research' to be taken forward by the two
      NGOs. Specifically, the research significantly influenced WaterAid's work
      through their City-Wide Urban Planning for Sanitation and Water
        Project in Lusaka (Zambia), Maputo (Mozambique), Lagos (Nigeria) and
      Kinshasa (DR Congo), with that work currently on-track to deliver
      high-level city planning [2]. It also helped to develop an
      operational framework to diagnose service delivery in small towns,
      developing city `typologies' related to demographics, economic drivers,
      and autonomy in decision-making so as to inform specific intervention
      strategies and external support programmes. As the project report
      indicated, WaterAid `intend[s] to test our approach with the ultimate
        goal of improving the way that WaterAid as an organisation, and the WASH
        sector at large, addresses small town issues' [1; p. 31].
      Additionally, the research is being continued through a funded EngD
      currently being undertaken by Hofmann that is expected to produce a
      tool-kit which will be used by WaterAid in relation to their work on urban
      water access [2].
    DPU's research has influenced the re-tooling and capacity-building of
      professionals operating in the field, being used to develop reusable
      training materials to enhance the delivery of capacity development
      programmes in the Global South. Following from her work [d] with
      the International Water and Sanitation Centre in 2008, Allen was
      commissioned in 2009 by UNESCO-IHE, the largest international postgraduate
      water education facility in the world, based in Delft in The Netherlands,
      to design and deliver an online training course on policy, planning and
      methodological aspects of sanitation services in peri-urban regions
      delivered over a period of four months. According to UNESCO-IHE
      statistics, this course was received by over 3,000 planning officers and
      utility managers from all regions of the Global South. Allen's
      publications on water and sanitation in peri-urban areas, as well as a
      filmed lecture delivered at UNESCO-IHE in 2008 [7], were key
      resource materials in this training module. Distance-learning participants
      use the book published by Springer [c] as the primary resource
      that gives structure to the programme.
    In 2012, Allen designed and delivered a component for policymakers and
      practitioners on water justice, as part of a school on `water governance
      and the human right to water', organised by the Centro Interdisciplinario
      de Estudios sobre Desarrollo (CIDER), Universidad de los Andes, and the
      Municipal Government of Bogot&#225;. This was attended by over 30 policy-makers
      and practitioners, and has since been developed as a reusable educational
      resource to train 100 more people (including community leaders) on urban
      planning approaches to equitable water governance [4]. During
      2010-12, the DPU team of D&#225;vila, Levy, Cabannes and Allen advised the
      Indian Institute for Human Settlements (IIHS) on the design and
      implementation of their curriculum on urban settlements and services for
      working professionals, catering to 1,000 residential students [5].
    Following research in the transportation strand, D&#225;vila has delivered
      over 20 lectures in eight countries on the institutional, social, spatial
      and environmental factors underpinning sustainable pro-poor transport
      interventions arising from the DPU's work on local governance, urban
      mobility, and poverty reduction. This has supported a heightened
      international discussion amongst policy-makers and planners on the
      linkages between urban mobility and well-being, and has been reflected in
      increased media attention and high-level workshop events. As an example,
      in 2011 D&#225;vila and colleagues facilitated an international workshop in
      Colombia with over 200 participants to reflect upon the case of Medell&#237;n.
      This outlined the findings described in Section 3, and provided an
      opportunity for representatives from aid agencies, national governments,
      municipalities, local communities, academics, students and international
      experts to share views on the effectiveness of the municipal interventions
      and assess the potential of applying this model in other cities [6].
      The discussion gave rise to an international network of policy makers and
      professionals in urban development to exchange best practices on urban
      mobility, and led to a major book on the subject aimed at policymakers and
      practitioners in the Global South [e].
    This research by Davila and others in DPU attracted widespread interest
      from government actors aiming to incorporate findings about the impact
      that a relatively old technology such as cable-cars can have on dense,
      hilly, low-income urban areas. This input into policy thinking is
      demonstrated by the fact that, in April 2012, officials in Bogot&#225; and
      Cali, as well as La Paz in Bolivia, requested copies of the DPU's detailed
      research reports for each case study. Colombian government officials also
      requested copies of the final reports, and the book [e] was
      requested by municipal and national officials in Colombia, Bolivia,
      Argentina, Chile, Mexico and Cuba, including by Medellin's Metro Company [10].
      Between 14 December 2012 and 8 November 2013, the Spanish version of the
      book was accessed 4,264 times from the research website [9]. As
      municipal interest in aerial cable-cars multiplies around the world, this
      demand to look at outputs from the DPU's research demonstrates an
      eagerness to understand the potential economic, social and transport
      impacts of such systems. The Medell&#237;n model as examined by DPU researchers
      was also incorporated into international policy-making guides for pro-poor
      urban upgrading. For instance, it was included in the UN-Habitat Guides
      and launched at Rio+20 in 2012, and in the International Resource Panel
      report [3], a clear recognition that urban sustainability requires
      cities to provide a greater diversity of energy-efficient, low-emission
      transport with low environmental impact to reduce inequalities.
    The contribution of DPU research to the global debate on urban transport
      policy is demonstrated also by its widespread coverage in the popular
      media. For example, D&#225;vila was interviewed about his research findings for
      TV and radio in Colombia (Su Madre Naturaleza TV programme;
      Universidad Nacional Radio, twice) and Mexico (Guadalajara ITESO internet
      radio), and the reach has been further extended through coverage in major
      British and North American media outlets with global audiences, such as
      the BBC World Service and CBC [8].
    
ImpactSummary

    DPU's research by Davila, Allen et al into urban infrastructure has
      generated analytical tools used by policy-makers, practitioners and aid
      organisations to examine the distribution of and access to urban services.
      It has supported the development of training curricula used altogether by
      over 4,000 urban planners in cities of the Global South, and through
      partners in The Netherlands, India and Colombia. At the policy level, the
      research has informed local government actors in Colombia, and
      international bodies (e.g. UN-Habitat and the International Resource
      Panel) in planning, financing, monitoring and equitable delivery of
      infrastructure services. At the NGO level, new analytical approaches have
      been adopted by WaterAid in Mozambique, Nigeria, Zambia, and the
      Democratic Republic of the Congo as a result of DPU research.
    
UnderpinningResearch

    Today an estimated 3.4 billion people &#8212; almost half of the world's
      population &#8212; live in urban areas. In the Global South, rapid-paced
      urbanisation often occurs without adequate investment in infrastructure
      and basic services, with particularly severe consequences for the millions
      residing in low-income or unplanned areas. Research in the wider field of
      urban planning and development has shown that access to infrastructure
      services is vital to wealth creation, human well-being and environmental
      sustainability.
    Through a series of action-research projects with other organisations in
      the Global South, researchers at the Development Planning Unit (DPU) have
      (i) documented governance shifts in the production of urban and peri-urban
      infrastructure; (ii) examined potential and existing non-market based
      approaches to the provision of universal services; (ii) investigated the
      effects of infrastructure development on well-being, environmental justice
      and social inclusion; and (iv) assessed the extent and ways in which
      infrastructure supports more resilient urban systems. An important
      contribution by DPU has been in demonstrating the existing efforts of
      communities to meet their needs, and highlighting where conventional
      supply-driven and centralised systems of infrastructure provision are
      inadequate to address the needs of the urban and peri-urban poor.
    Between 2003 and 2013, researchers examined the governance of water and
      sanitation services in the peri-urban context. Led by Professor Julio D.
      D&#225;vila (Head of Department), Dr Adriana Allen (Senior Lecturer) and
      Pascale Hofmann (Lecturer), a three-year research project in 2003-06,
      funded by DFID, analysed the access to water and sanitation in
      metropolitan regions of India, Tanzania, Egypt, Mexico and Venezuela. This
      produced a path-breaking diagnostic framework to analyse governance
      approaches to addressing water poverty, from the "policy-driven" to the
      `needs-driven' [a]. Research findings showed that neither
      centralised supply policies nor the marketplace, such as through
      large-scale profit-making enterprises, can meet urban needs. Through case
      studies, the research showed that access is mainly needs-driven and
      informal, not the result of formal policies. The key to structural
      improvements in water and sanitation hence lies in the recognition of
      these practices and their re-articulation under new governance regimes.
    This framework informed two subsequent projects. A study commissioned in
      2007-08 by the International Water and Sanitation Centre (IRC) explored
      approaches to sanitation that work for the urban poor across the urban
      Global South. Researchers examined hybrid governance arrangements emerging
      in peri-urban areas and the role of `service co-production' in supporting
      the urban and peri-urban poor to effectively access sanitation services [b
        + d]. Allen also advised WaterAid and Building Partnerships in
      Development in Water and Sanitation (BPD) on a project from 2009-10 that
      examined water and sanitation delivery in small towns, a context often
      overlooked in current debates. This research examined the opportunities
      and challenges faced by local governments, utility providers, citizens and
      external support agencies in six WaterAid country programmes in Asia and
      Africa. The findings [c] revealed that many existing assistance
      programmes in small towns result in finance and technology decisions that
      then dictate planning and design; instead, it is desirable that technology
      and finance decisions be responsive to circumstances on the ground,
      particularly how each town is connected demographically, economically and
      politically to surrounding areas.
    Access to affordable and efficient transport is another essential need of
      poor residents in urban areas. DPU researchers have thus also examined the
      role of progressive local governments in providing improved access to
      transport infrastructure for excluded low-income populations. Led by
      Davila, this was the first independent evaluation of an innovative urban
      upgrading and pro-poor transportation system in Medell&#237;n, Colombia's
      second largest city, where the world's first modern urban aerial cable-car
      mass transport system targeted at a low-income area had been implemented [e].
      Medell&#237;n is fast gaining a reputation for a series of urban interventions
      backed by solid municipal management, aimed at redressing the city's deep
      and longstanding social and spatial imbalances. The research contrasted
      this experience with that of Soacha, a low-income, poorly run municipality
      near to Bogot&#225;. It documented the institutional genesis and technical
      features of Medell&#237;n's cable-car lines and examples of innovation and
      political boldness. For instance, municipal investment in a comprehensive
      programme of upgrading of the areas served (e.g. social housing, public
      spaces, new libraries and schools, and training and employment
      opportunities) had an even wider impact on quality of life than the highly
      visible and attractive new form of public transport. These public
      facilities were designed by top architects using high-quality materials in
      a deliberate reversal of the conventional practice of providing
      low-quality services to the poor. Using participatory budgeting, whereby
      residents collectively decide on the use of public investment, city
      authorities are seeking to change an entrenched culture of patron-client
      politics.
    