CaseStudyId: 36510
Title: 
    3D body scanning in clothing manufacturing and retail, and healthcare
    

ImpactDetails

    UCL's research pioneered 3D body-surface scanning and its application to
      the clothing industry. Since 2008, sizing surveys have been conducted in
      numerous countries, leading to improvements in clothing manufacture and
      efficiency in the global retail industry overall. In addition the research
      has now also had impact in healthcare by supporting work on combating
      obesity and related diseases such as diabetes. Further success is
      evidenced by the growth of UCL spinout companies.
    Sizing surveys: Since 2008, countries around the world,
      including Germany, Thailand, Mexico and Italy (2012) [a] have conducted
      large-scale sizing surveys, based on the earlier UK National Sizing
      Survey. UCL either managed or advised on these national surveys. In
      Germany, where the survey was carried out in 2008, the results have been
      used to update German size charts, produce virtual avatars, and by Sizemic
      to create a range of SizeGERMANY fit mannequins [b].
    In Thailand, the anthropometrics data generated by the 2009 national size
      survey has been used to assist the Thai clothing industry. The scan data
      collected in SizeTHAILAND was used to construct the first-ever standard
      Thai body size chart. The chart has now been used by clothing
      manufacturers in Thailand to design and produce clothes that better fit
      the Thai population. The director of SizeTHAILAND confirms that "according
      to feedback from leading uniform clothing manufacturers who have adopted
      the SizeTHAILAND sizing system, there has been an approximately 35%
      reduction in overall clothing alterations." [c]
    Impact on retail and manufacturing: The results of the
      SizeUK survey have had a significant impact on manufacturing. Analysing
      the SizeUK anthropometrics data and related analytics, UCL and its
      partners developed company/brand specific size charts for over 25 UK
      retailers based on the retailer's/brand's specific demographic customer
      profile. This work started in 2005 but has been ongoing through 2008-2013
      as companies redo their size charts and new companies purchase the SizeUK
      data.
    Since 2008, manufacturers have particularly benefited from the
      development and use of SizeUK and SizeGERMANY fit mannequins. Fit
      mannequins are used in the clothing industry for product development and
      quality assurance. The work by Buxton, described above, has underpinned
      Sizemic's commercialisation of fit mannequins, developed from 3D SizeUK
      shape data. This process ensures the mannequins are realistic and have
      accurate body shapes, truly representative of their age group and target
      customer profile.
    Sizemic offers both customised mannequins and a range of specially
      developed generic mannequins, available in a variety of sizes and shapes
      representing different age groups for both genders. In Germany, the range
      consists of 13 standard-sized fashion mannequins for men, women and
      children [b]. This enables retailers to establish the optimum body shape
      for their target market and standardise this across their supply chain,
      ensuring that all of a company's suppliers are developing and fitting
      product on the same body size and shape. Sizemic's managing director lists
      feedback from the company's clients on the use of fit mannequins: "greater
      accuracy and consistency of fit as all suppliers are fitting and
      developing product on exactly the same body size and shape (size and shape
      standard); excellent QA [quality assurance] communication tool; reduction
      in returns for fit and sizing; reduction in production development time
      and costs." [d]
    Use of these mannequins speeds up the product development lifecycle, as
      samples no longer need to be shipped back and forth between suppliers in
      Asia and retailers in Europe and America [d]. This helps to underpin `fast
      fashion' by reducing lead times, reducing the need for sampling and
      ultimately reducing air-freight costs by ensuring the correct products
      reach the correct retailers and consumers. Improved garment fit and
      development efficiency enhances the suppliers' relationship with their
      retail clients, ensuring benefits on both sides of the transaction as
      well. The increased customer satisfaction and loyalty leads to increased
      sales and therefore profit. This is particularly true given the growth of
      internet shopping, with retailers taking on the burden of supplying
      customers with multiple sizes as they are unsure what size will fit.
    Prior to the use of fit mannequins, it would typically take four to five
      iterations of a sample before a retailer could finally approve it. This
      has now been reduced to one or possibly two iterations, resulting in at
      least a 50% reduction in sample making, shipping and fit model costs. It
      also speeds up the product development time by at least 25%, which is
      critical for the `fast fashion' retailers that make up Sizemic's
      customers, including Tesco, New Look, Topshop, Miss Selfridge, Sainsbury's
      and Boden [d].
    Another UCL spinout company, Bodymetrics, originally set up in 2000,
      produces body scanners for use in clothing retail. At Selfridges
      department store in London and Bloomingdales stores on the west coast of
      America, Bodymetrics pods scan customers to provide made-to-measure jeans
      and identify which brand will most suit individual customers; as of 2012,
      the pod accounted for 20% of all premium jeans sales at Selfridges, where
      it has been in use since 2009 [e] and where it grosses $5,000 annually per
      square foot of retail space [f]. In 2011, another pod was installed in a
      high-street fast-fashion store in London [g]. The retailer, New Look,
      also uses Bodymetrics scanning technology in-house to ensure uniformity of
      size for garments manufactured in factories across the world [g].
    Adoption of new technology in healthcare: Treleaven and his
      collaborators have developed a 3D healthcare system for GP practices that
      analyses and comments upon a patient's 3D anthropometrics, comparing the
      patient's scan to the SizeUK data. A patient is scanned and the GP then
      compares the patient's anthropometrics data with the SizeUK database to
      identify any deviation of the patient from national norms, such as over or
      underweight and the shape of the stomach which is an indicator of the
      propensity for the onset of Type II Diabetes. A company, ShapeDynamics,
      was established in 2010 to support the software. Since 2011, the system
      has been undergoing trials at a large private GP practice in the City of
      London. To date, 240 patients have been scanned. [h]
    Creation of spinout companies: The spread of national
      sizing surveys around the world has had an economic benefit for Sizemic.
      Set up in 2008 as a UCL spinout, the company now has 10 employees, with
      offices in London and Hong Kong, and a turnover of &#163;1m [d]. Since 2008,
      Bodymetrics has expanded to 10 employees and started business in the
      United States [i, e].
    
ImpactSummary

    UCL's pioneering use of 3D body surface scanning and national
      anthropometric surveys has had impact in the fashion industry and
      healthcare. In 2008, a UCL spinout, Sizemic, was founded to sell clothing
      size charts and fit mannequins based on the UK survey data, helping
      manufacturers and retailers improve the fit of their clothing, and reduce
      their product development times and costs. Sizemic now has 10 employees
      and a turnover of &#163;1m. The research also led to other national sizing
      surveys, including in Germany (2008/9), Thailand (2009/10) and Mexico
      (2010), with results used for product development. In 2009, UCL built a
      prototype 3D-healthcare system for GPs and established a company,
      ShapeDynamics, to support the platform. The software is being tested at a
      private healthcare practice in London. Another UCL spinout, Bodymetrics,
      has commercialised body scanners for use as a clothes-fitting aid in
      stores.
    
UnderpinningResearch

    Between 1995 and 1998, Professor Philip Treleaven and his research group
      at UCL developed the first size-extraction software for the Hamamatsu 3D
      scanner. His research team was one of the first groups to develop software
      for extracting linear measurements from a point cloud. This involved
      taking the point cloud, cleaning the data of outliers, identifying body
      landmarks, and then calculating linear measurements related to the body
      landmark (e.g. chest circumference).
    In the late 1990s, Treleaven realised the potential of these scanners for
      conducting national anthropometrics surveys. However, whole body scanners
      are 3D shape capture devices rather than devices for just capturing linear
      `tape measure' measurements, so to realise their full potential, three
      areas of research were required &#8212; (a) software engineering (b) 3D body
      modelling and (c) 3D applications [1].
    An initial challenge was in software engineering, as in order to fully
      utilise the potential of 3D whole-body scanners for surveys and screening
      subjects, a comprehensive data management infrastructure was required to
      automate registration, manage the measurement of subjects, store the body
      data, protect sensitive body data, and analyse the anthropometrics data.
    From 2000 to 2008, Treleaven and his team worked with the US scanner
      company TC2 to develop pioneering size-extraction software. A benchmarking
      process required the scanning of a calibration mannequin, a range of
      adults and children of different ethnic origins, plus a range of underwear
      materials. The work led to SizeUK, Britain's first National Sizing Survey
      [1, 2] since the 1950s. Between 2001 and 2002, measurements were taken
      from more than 11,000 people across the UK using TC2 body scanners.
      Volunteers were chosen across three national regions to represent both
      genders, across seven different age groups from 16 years to 95 years,
      taking into account ethnicity and socio-economic factors. The software
      required Treleaven to develop advanced image processing to identify body
      landmarks (e.g. chest, waist, hips) and then extract linear or girth
      measurements. It was refined for later use in SizeUSA and other national
      surveys.
    Treleaven's UCL collaborator, Professor Bernard Buxton, conducted
      pioneering research into 3D body modelling for analysing 3D shape and
      calculating average bodies based on shape [3, 4]. This was developed
      specifically to generate 3D average body shapes from subsets of the SizeUK
      data and show the variation in shape across the subset. This involved the
      application of a robust and efficient iterative closest point (ICP)
      algorithm for fitting a deformable 3D human torso model to noisy data [3,
      4, 5]. This led to further work into 3D pattern development for custom and
      ready-to-wear clothing.
    UCL co-ordinated the data analytics used for size chart and pattern block
      development with retailers including Marks &amp; Spencer, Tesco, Arcadia
      and Next. All clothing sold by major retailers is based on their company
      size charts, which are specific to a given demographic customer profile.
      The computer science innovation was to use 3D body modelling that worked
      using 3D shape data for averaging, rather than the traditional method of
      using linear measurements to calculate average body sizes and group
      cohorts for size ranges.
    Since 2008, Treleaven's research has focused on the development of
      software for clothing technology, such as customised 3D virtual and
      physical fit mannequins based on Buxton's 3D shape analysis tools. The 3D
      body modelling research was used to cluster subjects based on their shape
      rather than linear measurements. This data was then used to produce unique
      and highly accurate virtual and physical mannequins. The 3D body modelling
      research allows an `average' virtual mannequin of a specific size for a
      given cohort of subjects to be produced, which is then used to produce a
      range of virtual mannequins (e.g. for UK women's sizes 6 to 28). The
      physical mannequins are built according to data from SizeUK and
      SizeGermany, and are manufactured in China, with the 3D body modelling
      research continuing to be pursued at UCL.
    In healthcare, Treleavan has worked with Professor Jonathan Wells at
      UCL's Institute of Child Health on the analysis of SizeUK, SizeUSA and
      SizeTHAILAND for obesity. This involved 3D body modelling research [6],
      demonstrating the limitations of BMI and the `velocity' of obesity in
      children. The group has built anthropometrics software and analytics for
      doctors' surgeries.
    The main researchers were: Professor Philip Treleaven, Professor of
      Computer Science at UCL since 1986, Professor Bernard Buxton, Professor of
      Information Processing Systems from 1994 and then Dean of Engineering till
      2009, and Dr. Anthony Ruto (consultant, 2009-2013).
    