CaseStudyId: 36533
Title: 
    CT colonography for diagnosis of colorectal cancer in older symptomatic
      patients
    

ImpactDetails

    After learning of the results of our preliminary analysis of 2009, the
      Director of the NHS Cancer Screening Programmes asked Halligan to present
      the data to the next meeting of the National Bowel Cancer Screening
      Advisory Group. The data were orally presented in April 2010 when Halligan
      concluded that barium enema should be withdrawn from the NHS immediately
      (where circumstances allowed) and that CT colonography was a safe,
      sensitive, and acceptable alternative to colonoscopy for diagnosis of
      colorectal cancer. Within one month this led to an Interim Guidance Update
      being issued by the Bowel Cancer Screening Programme (BCSP IGU 007 Apr
      1010), which was sent to the Director, Lead Nurse, and Lead manager of
      every NHS bowel screening centre, and to Quality Assurance Reference
      Centre (QARC) coordinators. This stated that the SIGGAR trials "show
        that double contrast barium enema is significantly inferior to CT
        colonography for detection of colorectal cancer and large polyps. It
        also shows that the false-negative rate for colorectal cancer is
        significantly higher for barium enema." The screening centres were
      asked to use "CTC rather than barium enema wherever local expertise and
        circumstances permit" [a].
    The subsequent "Guidelines for the use of imaging in the NHS Bowel Cancer
      Screening Programme" (NHSBCSP Publication no. 5, July 2010) stated that, "Where
        imaging is indicated, CTC is the preferred method. Double contrast
        barium enema is reported to have a fourfold false negative rate; it is
        therefore not appropriate for screening patients...Where high-quality
        CTC is not available locally, the patient should be referred elsewhere
        for examination" [b].
    In the light of the trials' findings, Halligan was asked to join the
      Bowel Cancer Screening Advisory Panel in 2010 to advise on the national
      implementation of CT colonography in the screening programme.
      Subsequently, the Programme Director asked that a committee be established
      with the specific remit to oversee the implementation of CT colonography
      in the Bowel Cancer Screening programme, and its subsequent quality
      control. The Bowel Cancer Screening Programme CT Colonography Steering
      Group was formed in February 2012 and Halligan was asked to sit as
      advisor. The group updated the Guidelines for the use of imaging in the
      National Bowel Cancer Screening Programme, published November 2012 [c].
      The Guidance repeats the statement that barium enema should be
      discontinued immediately in favour of CT colonography and references the
      HTA monograph from the SIGGAR trials [d]. The trials are also
      cited on the "key research in bowel cancer and bowel cancer screening"
      page of the NHS Bowel Cancer Screening Programme website [e].
    Impact can be proven by analysis of imaging procedure rates within the
      Bowel Cancer Screening Programme. In 2007 and 2008 the numbers of barium
      enema and CT colonography studies performed in the Programme were
      approximately similar (71 vs 99 for 2007 and 210 vs 284 for 2008). In
      2010, the year the guidelines for imaging were published, the figures were
      265 barium enema vs 1,291 CT colonography. Figures for 2011 were 128 vs
      1,833 and for 2012 were 76 vs 1,928 [f].
    The SIGGAR trials' findings that CTC was more accurate than barium enema
      and not significantly different to colonoscopy have also impacted on the
      provision of diagnostic services to symptomatic NHS patients. Firstly,
      barium enema services are being reduced in the light of the trials'
      findings and secondly, CT colonography provision is helping alleviate
      pressure on endoscopy services generated by both the symptomatic service
      and the screening programme [g]. The British Society of
      Gastrointestinal and Abdominal Radiology have convened a committee in
      parallel to the screening programme to oversee the implementation of CT
      colonography in the symptomatic NHS setting; Halligan also sits on this
      committee. In May 2013, a meeting of the Royal College of Radiologists
      Professional Support &amp; Standards Board made the decision to revise its
      guidelines on the imaging of colorectal cancer in the light of the
      findings of the SIGGAR trials. Halligan joined the Working Party
      responsible for revising these guidelines (due December 2013) [h].
    The impact of the trials reaches beyond the UK: the trial data were used
      by a US radiologists Working Group on CT colonography in 2010 to justify a
      higher rating for CT colonography for screening in the American College of
      Radiology Appropriateness Criteria; they are also currently using the data
      to evaluate national reimbursement for CT colonography [i]. The
      trial data were also presented to the National Board of Health &amp;
      Welfare in Sweden in 2012 during the development of new and updated
      National Guidelines on colorectal cancer to make the case that barium
      enema should be withdrawn in Sweden and replaced by CT colonography [j].
      Reviewing the trials in March 2013, the most-prominent colonoscopist in
      the USA, Douglas Rex MD, stated, "these study findings justify widespread
      incorporation of CTC into U.S. hospitals, with subsequent abandonment of
      DCBE" [k].
    
ImpactSummary

    Work led by researchers at UCL has had a national and international
      impact on the way that patients with symptoms suggestive of colorectal
      cancer are investigated. Specifically, investigation of the role of CT
      colonography (a relatively novel and non-invasive method of investigating
      the large bowel using an X-ray scanner) has led to this examination
      replacing the standard alternative of barium enema in the UK National
      Bowel Cancer Screening Programme and for symptomatic patients in the NHS.
      The research has also led to easing of pressure on over-subscribed
      endoscopy services in the NHS because patients can be safely diverted
      towards CT colonography as an alternative.
    
UnderpinningResearch

    The impacts reported here arise from a systematic review of CT
      colonography and two multicentre clinical trials led by researchers at
      UCL. Prior to this research, the usual approach to investigating patients
      with symptoms of bowel cancer was either barium enema examination or
      colonoscopy of the large bowel (amounting to over 700,000 patients per
      year in the UK). Both investigations had limitations whereas CT
      colonography offered theoretical advantages. However, CT was usually
      advocated to screen asymptomatic patients for pre-malignant polyps but no
      randomised controlled trials had been undertaken.
    Professor Steve Halligan (Centre for Medical Imaging, UCL Division of
      Medicine) realised that most published trials of CT had actually recruited
      symptomatic patients and believed that existing data showed that CT
      colonography was likely to have high diagnostic accuracy for detecting
      established cancer in such patients. In order to confirm this he performed
      a systematic review with the primary aim of extracting data on cancer
      detection, from primary studies, with statistical collaborators at Oxford
      (Altman, Mallett) and cancer epidemiologists at Imperial (Atkin). The
      systematic review found a pooled sensitivity for cancer by CT colonography
      of the order of 96% &#8212; i.e. equivalent to colonoscopy, the current
      "gold-standard" [1].
    Aware of CT colonography as a potentially useful diagnostic test and
      seeing these data abstracted, the NHS's Health Technology Assessment
      programme commissioned research on the technology in the NHS. An
      application for funding was led by Professor Halligan as CI. Two
      multicentre pragmatic randomised controlled trials of CT colonography
      versus the existing NHS standards of barium enema and colonoscopy in
      symptomatic patients were proposed. Endpoints included cancer detection,
      economic modelling within and beyond the trial time-horizon, and
      health-psychology [2]. A specific focus was how detection of
      pathology outside the bowel influenced use of the test in the NHS. Key
      collaborators were Atkin (Imperial, cancer epidemiology), Lilford
      (Birmingham, health-economics and modelling), and Wardle (UCL, health
      psychology).
    The application was successful and 8,484 patients in 21 NHS hospitals
      were registered and 5,384 randomised and ultimately analysed (BE trial:
      2527 BE, 1277 CTC. Colonoscopy trial: 1047 colonoscopy, 533 CTC). Known as
      the "SIGGAR" (Special Interest Group in Gastrointestinal &amp; Abdominal
      Radiology) trial, this was the first RCT of CT colonography worldwide and
      the largest RCT in gastrointestinal radiology. Procedure detection rates
      and subsequent tests/resources were collected and false-negative diagnoses
      of intra- and extra-colonic cancer identified via NHS Information Centre
      three years post-randomisation, and trial arms compared. Preliminary data
      were presented orally in 2009.
    SIGGAR found that CT colonography was superior to barium enema for
      diagnosis of colorectal cancer and large polyps [3]. There was no
      significant difference between CT colonography and colonoscopy [4].
      CT colonography was significantly better perceived by patients, and was
      associated with fewer immediate and delayed adverse events [5]. CT
      colonography was significantly more cost-effective than barium enema (both
      within trial and extrapolated) and equally cost-effective as colonoscopy [3].
      Extra-colonic tumours were detected by CT colonography in approximately 4%
      of recruited patients, of which around half were malignant.
    