CaseStudyId: 36651
Title: 
    The DichroWeb Analysis Server and Protein Circular Dichroism Data Bank:
      analysis tools for structural biology
    

ImpactDetails

    Both DICHROWEB and the PCDDB are widely used by researchers in industry
      as well as for
      academic research and advanced teaching. DICHROWEB currently has over
      3,600 registered
      users. Over 375,000 DICHROWEB analyses have been run and the service has
      been cited in over
      1,000 publications [a]. This resource is free for academic and
      non-profit research use but industrial
      subscribers each pay a small annual fee for use of the service. The list
      of past and present
      industrial users includes representatives of the pharmaceutical,
      biotechnology and food sectors,
      and ranges from large multinational companies to the SME sector. Fees from
      industrial users
      provide an income of &#163;2-5,000/year which is used as a contribution to
      running costs. No formal
      registration is required to access PCDDB, but users can register to
      facilitate multiple queries or
      updates of contents. Currently registered industrial users include a
      number of large pharmaceutical
      companies and life science SMEs, plus about a dozen biomedical product and
      clinical diagnostic
      suppliers, amongst others. Since its launch in 2009, the database has had
      over 175,000 unique
      hits from 41 different countries, and 89,890 downloads (as at March 2012)
      [b].
    Analysis of citations of our key publications reveals that a wide range
      of companies have obtained
      valuable results from using the tools that have been made accessible
      through DICHROWEB (many
      of which were developed by Wallace's group). For example, three studies
      cited below [c-e]
      illustrate typical recent cases in which the analysis tools within
      DICHROWEB have been applied to
      analysis of the stability and solution properties of proteins being
      developed as biological products,
      particularly vaccine candidates and tools for biomedical investigation. A
      complete list of citations
      with industrial co-authors is available [f]. This indicates use of
      DICHROWEB by a wide range of
      large and small companies from the pharmaceutical, vaccine, biotech, food
      and instrumentation
      sectors. A review of the patent literature has shown 11 patent
      applications from major corporations
      referring to the underpinning research papers, further indicating the
      commercial relevance of our
      work. The list of assignees that hold these patents include Roche Holding
      AG, Pfizer Inc. and
      Collplant Ltd [g].
    The use of both DICHROWEB and the PCDDB is promoted and encouraged by all
      the major
      commercial manufacturers of equipment for CD spectroscopy, who have
      established links from
      their own company websites either to DICHROWEB alone or to both DICHROWEB
      and the
      PCDDB [h]. The well-established and prestigious RCSB Protein Data
      Bank Knowledge Base
      website, which is a primary access point for publicly available
      atomic-resolution protein structures,
      also links relevant entries to the appropriate entries in the PCDDB; both
      sites are also linked from a
      number of widely used bioinformatics websites and are now being promoted
      via social media.
    Wallace's work has been recognised in several awards and in invitations
      to present her work at
      international conferences. Her presentation with the prestigious
      AstraZeneca Award by the
      Biochemical Society in 2010 recognised her "outstanding work which,
        through biomedical
        advances, leads to development of a new reagent or method" [i].
      In 2011 she was a keynote
      lecturer at the CASSS Higher Order Structure meeting on spectroscopy for
      industry (Rockville, MD,
      USA) [j].
    Both DICHROWEB and the PCDDB are widely used in advanced teaching both in
      the UK outside
      Birkbeck College and internationally. These include workshops for
      researchers such as an annual
      EU/UK summer school, which regularly involves delegates from industry, and
      university courses;
      DICHROWEB is mentioned in course notes and curricula from the Universities
      of Texas and
      Pittsburgh [k]. The use of both databases as resources for
      undergraduate teaching of CD
      spectroscopy has recently been recommended [l].
    
ImpactSummary

    DICHROWEB is a comprehensive, user-friendly server that provides access
      to computational tools
      for the determination of protein secondary structure from data obtained
      through circular dichroism
      (CD) and synchrotron radiation (SRCD) spectroscopy. The Protein Circular
      Dichroism Data Bank
      (PCDDB) is a database of spectra obtained using these techniques and
      allied data. Both resources
      are widely and increasingly used in many countries and are proving useful
      in industrial research
      (for example, in drug discovery) as well as academia and advanced
      teaching. DICHROWEB
      currently has over 3,600 registered users and over 375,000 DICHROWEB
      analyses have been
      run. Since the launch of PCDDB in 2009, the database has had over 175,000
      unique hits from 41
      different countries, and 89,890 downloads.
    
UnderpinningResearch

    Circular dichroism (CD) spectroscopy is a powerful tool for the
      structural analysis of peptides and
      proteins that was first developed in the 1960s. It measures the absorption
      spectra of molecules in
      the far ultra-violet (UV) part of the electromagnetic spectrum. As this
      absorption is influenced by
      the geometry of the peptide backbone, the absorption spectrum can be used
      to determine the
      proportion of each secondary structure type present in a protein. It is a
      method that is widely used
      in both academia and industry for the characterisation of proteins. In
      recent years, technical
      improvements, particularly the development of synchrotron radiation CD
      (SRCD) spectroscopy,
      have enabled lower wavelength data to be collected and thus increased the
      information content of
      the spectra. Wallace and her group have been and are still at the
      forefront of the development of
      these new techniques.
    An analysis of the secondary structure of a protein from its CD spectrum
      is based on comparisons
      with a set of reference spectra obtained from proteins with structures
      known to atomic resolution.
      Many different programs for the analysis of CD data have been made
      publicly available, although
      these required input and produced output data in different formats and
      units, and produced
      different types of comparison metrics. Wallace and her co-workers
      developed and continue to
      update and maintain the DICHROWEB server (http://dichroweb.cryst.bbk.ac.uk)
      as a user-friendly
      web-based interface to a wide range of both well-characterised and novel
      tools for the analysis of
      SRCD and CD spectroscopy data [1]. DICHROWEB users are able to
      submit their spectra in any
      recognised format and have access to many combinations of analysis
      programs and reference
      databases. The degree of agreement between the experimental data and a
      spectrum obtained by
      back-calculation from the predicted secondary structures is returned as a
      simple root mean square
      goodness-of-fit parameter, as well as provided as an easily interpretable
      graphical comparison of
      the experimental and calculated data [2].
    Research by Wallace and her collaborators has enabled a range of new
      features, input
      parameters, data types and reference databases to be added to DICHROWEB,
      taking into account
      advances in X-ray crystallography, NMR spectroscopy and bioinformatics
      that have greatly
      increased the range of atomic-resolution protein structures available and
      categorised them more
      precisely into fold families. Among these, new reference data were
      produced which cover
      secondary structure of the protein and fold space, using high quality SRCD
      data, allowing more
      accurate prediction of secondary structure [3]. Furthermore, new
      computational and bioinformatics
      developments have been incorporated by the Wallace group [4].
      Techniques for the analysis of the
      dynamic properties of protein folding and of protein-protein interactions
      have also been developed
      [5].
    In a parallel development, Wallace created the Protein Circular Dichroism
      Data Bank (PCDDB) in
      collaboration with Dr Robert Janes (Queen Mary University of London) as a
      publicly available
      repository for CD and SRCD data and a BBSRC Bioinformatics resource for
      data sharing. It was
      first released in December 2009 and is now fully operational for data
      deposit as well as access [6].
      Besides the spectra, which are available for download graphically or as
      text files, this databank
      includes metadata such as sample types and experimental conditions. It
      also contains a set of
      tools for validating CD spectra which are extremely valuable for the
      community, particularly as
      journals do not insist on CD spectra being validated if the main emphasis
      of the publication is on a
      different technique. The database is freely available to the community via
      a web-based interface
      that runs on all up-to-date platforms and browsers and is user-friendly
      enough for non-experts to
      use. Each entry in PCDDB is linked to a wide range of other structural
      biology resources and also
      linked through to DICHROWEB to allow users to run their own analyses on
      stored datasets. This
      database is a valuable resource for bioinformatics and experimental
      studies on proteins; it parallels
      the Protein Data Bank (PDB) as a repository for crystallographic data and
      enables comparisons
      with known proteins [7].
    