CaseStudyId: 36668
Title: 
    Application of advanced analytical methods for damage assessment of
      cultural artefacts in museums and historic buildings
    

ImpactDetails

    The underpinning research described above has had an impact both on
      indoor monitoring of microclimates in museums and on damage assessment of
      cultural heritage materials. It has succeeded in raising awareness to
      risks of damage to objects on display in showcases and in enclosures
      during storage or in transit. The dosimeter that we have developed is a
      small portable tool with a fast response time that is practical for use in
      museums and galleries. The dosimeter is easy for conservators to use in
      order to evaluate whether inappropriate materials have been used in
      showcases and as backboards for paintings, and the effect of different air
      exchange rates.
    Use of dosimeters in museums
    Throughout our research programme, we have worked with the Tate Gallery
      to develop and test our devices so that they are useful and relevant to
      professional conservators. The Tate now uses our dosimeters to monitor
      levels of air pollution in its store rooms and identify effects on
      paintings and sculptures. The Conservation Department at the Tate report
      that: "The Piezoelectric quartz crystal dosimeter PQC has provided a
        means of gaining a much better idea of the extent of air pollution in
        store rooms and, more importantly, identifying its effect on the
        collection of paintings and sculpture...We can now start putting into
        practice new routines, where necessary using better (and more expensive)
        materials, and prioritise our decisions for a remedial process that will
        take many years to complete" [a].
    Other museums have changed their practices as a result of using our
      dosimeters. The Museo Bellas Artes in Valencia, for example, used
      dosimeters to monitor the conditions within microclimate frames. As a
      result of these tests, the museum now only uses acid-free materials inside
      the frames, and avoids certain materials, such as chloroform which was
      previously used in the joints of the frames. The dosimeters have also been
      used to identify pollutants from cleaning products used in regular
      maintenance in the museum [b].
    Our dosimeters were used in 2007-8 by English Heritage to assess the
      oxidising potential of the atmosphere in two of their properties: Apsley
      House and Kenwood House, both of which house internationally important
      painting collections. The analyses allowed important management decisions
      to be taken on refitting the air filtration system and the impact of dust
      from the gravel at the entrance to Kenwood House. The lead-coated PQC
      crystals determined the risk to paintings from microclimate frames used to
      protect them against relative humidity fluctuations and internally
      generated pollutants. The research has increased the use of such frames
      that are now a standard approach to displaying vulnerable paintings in
      historic house environments [c].
    Use of dosimeters in art transport: the Lady with an Ermine
    In 2011, our dosimeters provided vital information during the transport
      and exhibition of Leonardo da Vinci's Lady with an Ermine. There
      had been considerable controversy about whether the painting should be
      able to leave its permanent home in Poland [d] but, as part of a
      monitoring programme, our dosimeters were placed within the micro-climate
      showcase in which the painting was exhibited at the Royal Palace in Madrid
      to monitor the level of corrosiveness of the air within the frame. Art
      transport company SIT-Artyd report that this monitoring showed: "good
        results that warranted the continuity of the tour to London and Berlin,
        before the return to home in Poland" [e]. As a result of
      this successful experience, SIT are now promoting and including the
      dosimetry in their exhibition, storage and transport services for museums
      in Madrid, Valencia and Barcelona.
    Dissemination of our research to professional conservators
    We have disseminated our research findings to professional conservators
      across Europe and beyond, through our collaborative work, and through
      presentation of our results at a series of workshops and conferences aimed
      at professionals. For example, through the IDAP project we developed an
      algorithm for processing AFM images to allow damage assessment of collagen
      fibres. Damage to collagen at the fibre and fibril level is now taught at
      regular workshops held by the School of Conservation in Denmark [g].
      Odlyha herself has presented at many conferences, including in Turin,
      Vienna, Evora, Portugal, and recently in Madrid and has participated in
      workshops held in London and Madrid. These were well attended by
      conservation professionals from many organisations including the British
      Museum the National Gallery in London, and the Mus&#233;e National Picasso
      (Paris) [i]. Odlyha has also edited, and written an introduction
      to, a chapter on cultural heritage in the Journal of Thermal Analysis and
      Calorimetry (May 2011).
    
ImpactSummary

    Research by Marianne Odlyha and her group at the Department of Biological
      Sciences, Birkbeck, University of London, has led to the development of
      minimally invasive analytical methods and portable tools (dosimeters) for
      assessing damage to historical artefacts. These dosimeters are now in use
      at locations around the world, including the Tate Gallery's store rooms,
      English Heritage properties (Apsley House) and museums in Ghent, Cracow
      and Mexico. Methods for assessing damage, and for mitigation of pollutant
      impact on objects in museum enclosures, have been disseminated to
      conservation professionals through workshops and training courses held
      across Europe. The assessment and prevention of damage is vital to
      conserve the cultural as well as the monetary value of artefacts.
    
UnderpinningResearch

    The main theme of our research over the last 20 years has been the
      assessment of damage to heritage materials, developing new ways of
      detecting damage, analysing what is causing it, and finding the best way
      of preventing further damage. We have focussed on the microclimates around
      objects, for example inside enclosures such as painting frames and museum
      display cases Working with collaborators in many European countries, we
      have adapted and optimised minimally invasive analytical methods for
      assessing damage.
    Our early research, beginning in the mid-90s, developed paint dosimeters
      to assess the effect of environmental factors, including pollutants, on
      canvas-supported paintings, combining this with characterisation of
      physicochemical alterations in paintings. This work was undertaken as part
      of a research consortium (co-ordinated by Odlyha at Birkbeck) working with
      curators, conservation scientists and conservator-restorers, including at
      the Tate Gallery in London. It was the first time that changes in paint
      media and artists' varnishes were characterised at the macro and molecular
      levels in accelerated aged paint films prepared according to traditional
      techniques [1].
    Following on from this work, we began development of an electronic
      dosimeter to assess possible damage to historical artefacts. We
      collaborated with QuartzTec, a small UK company, to modify their existing
      commercial instruments for suitability of operation in museum environments
      and for continuous electronic recording of data. Novel coatings were
      applied to piezoelectric quartz crystals (PQC). These were based on
      artists' paint media and were found to be sensitive to the presence of
      photo-oxidizing agents. These devices were tested through an EU-wide
      project, entitled `Monitoring of Indoor Environments for Cultural Heritage
      Preservation' (MIMIC), with devices being placed in seven major European
      museums, castles and historic houses, including the Petrie Museum at UCL,
      and English Heritage and National Trust properties. Research groups
      interacted with the conservators and arranged for exposure and
      documentation of the dosimeters together with monitoring of climate and
      pollutant data. This enabled determination of dose-response functions for
      the coatings and estimation of damage threshold levels [2].
    In 2006 we collaborated on a further EU project (SENSORGAN) to examine
      corrosion in lead-based organ pipes. Due to the size of the pipes, and
      the need to monitor the air flowing into the pipes, we had to further
      adapt our electronics, in particular by miniaturising the device. Also,
      another coating was developed which was sensitive to the volatile organic
      acids emitted from the wooden components of the organ and which were
      identified as the cause of corrosion. Our main collaborators were Chalmers
      University, Gothenburg, who provided support for calibrating the coated
      PQC dosimeters and analytical information on the coatings. The new model
      dosimeters were trialled in St Botolph's in London and in churches in
      Sweden and Cracow. Concurrently, we collaborated on another EU project
      (PROPAINT) with the University of Pisa on assessment of damage to
      varnished paintings in microclimate frames. We further adapted our devices
      to monitor conditions within the enclosed microclimate frames which are
      used to protect paintings and also modified the electronics to allow for
      battery operated devices. The overall research prototype included two
      calibrated coatings sensitive to photooxidising agents and to volatile
      organic acids [3].
    We have played key roles in the research consortia of two projects
      looking at damage to historical parchment (IDAP) and to historic
      tapestries from collections at Hampton Court and in the Royal Palace in
      Madrid (MODHT). In the former, we collaborated with Dr Laurent Bozec at
      the UCL Eastman Dental Institute to develop methods for assessing damage
      in collagen-based materials. This introduced for the first time the use of
      atomic force microscopy (AFM) and micro-thermal analysis for
      characterising changes in collagen at the nano-scale level, and mechanical
      testing in controlled environments. A method for quantification of AFM
      images of collagen was developed; this provided a measure of the extent of
      intact ordered structure present in the imaged surface and hence damage [4,5].
      Similar techniques were also applied to textiles (wool and silk) to
      evaluate the extent of damage in historical tapestry samples [6].
    