CaseStudyId: 36809
Title: 
    Use of the structure of serum amyloid P, a modulator of amyloid
      formation, for drug discovery and development
    

ImpactDetails

    The first therapeutic applications of modulating the interaction of serum
      amyloid P with its ligands revolved around compounds that interact with it
      to remove it from pathogenic amyloid fibres and therefore render those
      fibres more vulnerable to proteolytic degradation. A lead compound, CPHPC,
      was developed and shown to cross-link two SAP pentamers, removing the
      protein both from circulation and from interaction with amyloid. The
      discovery of this compound was critically dependent on the insights into
      cooperative ligand binding discovered through the decamericSAP/dAMP
      structure solved in Wood's lab at Birkbeck and reported in reference [2]
      above.
    A biotech company, Pentraxin Therapeutics Ltd (PTL), was spun out of UCL
      in 2001 to design drugs for the treatment of amyloid-related diseases and
      develop them; serum amyloid P became its first validated target [a],
      resulting in a series of patents. For example, in 2008, formulations of
      CPHPC were patented as a possible treatment for Alzheimer's disease [b].
      Preliminary results (published by the Centre for Amyloidosis and Acute
      Phase Proteins) showed SAP depletion in vivo [c]; however
      despite these and other promising results in mouse models and human data
      showing that CPHPC causes a fall in circulating concentrations of SAP,
      this drug has made little progress in clinical trials as a monotherapy for
      Alzheimer's disease.
    Wood and his co-workers in the Centre for Amyloidosis and Acute Phase
      Proteins at UCL and at PTL have now licensed a combination of CPHPC and
      anti-SAP antibodies to GlaxoSmithKline (GSK) as a treatment for systemic
      amyloidosis [d]. This therapy involves administering CPHPC (i/d
      GSK2315698) first to remove SAP from the patients' circulation and then
      administering an anti-SAP antibody (i/d GSK2398852); with no SAP in
      circulation, this antibody should be directed to amyloid-bound SAP to
      activate the patients' immune systems and destroy the amyloid.
    The first Phase I clinical trial of the combination therapy began
      recruiting patients diagnosed with systemic amyloidosis in June 2013 [e].
      This is a two-part trial; the first part is a dose escalation study to
      determine the safety of the two components and the second will assess its
      dose-response and effect on SAP concentrations in more detail. It is
      co-sponsored by three London hospitals and so contributes to the
      continuation of skilled employment in the UK, both at GSK and at these
      sites. GSK have hailed the importance of their collaboration with the
      Centre for Amyloidosis and Acute Phase Proteins as part of their strategy
      of academic engagement in drug discovery [d, f]. The potential
      value of this combination therapy has already attracted the attention of
      patient groups, despite its early stage of development; Amyloidosis
      Australia has described it as "...the most wonderful news about
        Amyloidosis we had heard in the past 8 years" [g].
    The known function of circulating SAP as a mediator of the inflammatory
      response is being exploited by the innovative biotech company Promedior
      Inc., based in Lexington, MA, USA. Promedior's work focuses on the
      development of recombinant forms of SAP (Pentraxin-2 or PTX-2) as
      treatments for fibrosis. This term refers to the formation of excessive
      connective tissue in response to inflammation, a response that plays an
      important part in many types of chronic organ failure. The mechanism for
      the activity of PTX-2 against fibrosis is based on its specific,
      calcium-mediated recognition of so-called "damage-mediated molecular
      patterns" (DAMPs) which are exposed when cells are damaged. This promotes
      the removal of the damaged proteins by immunoglobulins on the surface of
      macrophages. The mechanism of this interaction was elucidated using recent
      crystallographic data obtained by Promedior, which shows the calcium-and
      immunoglobulin-binding sites lying on opposite sides of the pentraxin
      complex. These studies, also, would not have been possible without access
      to the initial structures obtained by Wood's group at Birkbeck from 1994
      onwards.
    The most advanced compound in the Promedior pipeline is currently (summer
      2013) an injected form of PTX-2 designated PRM-151 [h]. This is in
      early clinical trials for the treatment of idiopathic pulmonary fibrosis
      (IPF), a chronic, progressive lung disease that kills about 5,000 people
      annually in the UK. The FDA and EMA have designated PRM-151 as an "orphan
      drug" for this condition, giving Promedior some specific commercial and
      marketing incentives [i]. A Phase I trial in IPF patients and
      healthy volunteers has shown that PTX-2 is safe, suggested that it can
      reduce fibrocyte levels in IPF patients, and recommended it for further
      clinical trials [j, k]; a Phase 2 trial is now in progress.
    Pentraxin formulations are also being developed for fibrous diseases of
      the retina. A Phase 2 clinical trial of PRM-151 to prevent scarring
      following trabeculectomy in glaucoma enrolled 124 patients from 14
      European study centres and was completed in November 2012 but is not yet
      published. A variant form of recombinant SAP, PTX-169, has now been
      developed for injection into the eye. Pre-clinical results presented at
      the Association for Research in Vision and Opthalmology in 2012 indicate
      that this compound shows promise in diabetic retinopathy and age-related
      macular degeneration, each of which affects millions of people worldwide [l];
      clinical trials are planned. Promedior is a thriving company and its
      SAP-based programmes make a significant contribution to economic growth
      and skilled employment in Massachusetts.
    
ImpactSummary

    Serum amyloid P, or pentraxin-2, is a pentameric calcium-binding protein
      that binds to amyloid fibrils. It has been implicated in the protection of
      those fibrils from proteolytic digestion and in the immune response to
      tissue damage. The structure of pentraxin-2 was first solved by Steve Wood
      and his co-workers in Tom Blundell's lab at Birkbeck in the 1990s. Wood
      has continued his work on the pentraxins at UCL, and the company Pentraxin
      Therapeutics Ltd was spun out of UCL to design and develop
      pentraxin-binding ligands (based on its structure) as potential treatments
      for Alzheimer's disease and amyloidosis. Promedior Inc. in the US is
      developing recombinant forms of pentraxin to control fibrosis. Several of
      these molecules are now in clinical trials.
    
UnderpinningResearch

    Deposits of a fibrillar form of protein known as amyloid have been
      associated with a wide range of human diseases including Alzheimer's
      disease, the most common form of dementia. Amyloid fibres formed from
      different proteins have essentially the same "cross-beta" structure. A
      number of other proteins have been discovered to be associated with
      amyloid fibres, among them a protein called serum amyloid P (SAP). This
      protein has been shown to not be required for fibre formation in vitro
      but is now known to stabilise the fibres in vivo.
    Knowledge of the three-dimensional structure of this protein has been an
      essential pre-requisite to understanding the mechanism of its interaction
      with amyloid. The structure of the native, pentameric form of SAP was
      first determined by a group led by Steve Wood in the former Department of
      Crystallography at Birkbeck, working under the overall direction of
      Professor (now Sir) Tom Blundell. This work was published in Nature
      in 1994 [1] and the structure released by the Protein Bank with
      the code 1SAC. The paper had attracted 336 citations by August 2013.
    Serum amyloid P is known to bind to amyloid fibres; to other protein
      ligands including fibronectin and glycosaminoglycans; and to DNA in a
      calcium dependent manner. This 3D structure, the first to be determined
      for a pentraxin, revealed that each SAP monomer has a fold remarkably
      similar to that seen in a family of carbohydrate-binding proteins, the
      legume lectins. Binding positions were identified in the crystal structure
      for two calcium ions, largely coordinated by the side chains of negatively
      charged amino acids that are conserved throughout the SAP family. SAP is
      known to be remarkably resistant to protease digestion in the presence of
      calcium, and this may be partly responsible for the protease resistance of
      amyloid fibrils in vivo.
    Following the determination of the crystal structure of SAP, the group
      undertook a comparative analysis of the pentraxin family, comparing the
      sequences, tertiary structures and quaternary arrangements of SAP with
      human C-reactive protein (CRP), Syrian hamster SAP and Limulus polyphemus
      CRP. Calcium-mediated ligand binding by each of these proteins was found
      to be similar, but sequence differences in the hydrophobic pocket
      explained the differential ligand specificities exhibited by the
      homologous proteins [2].
    Work by Wood and Dr Erhard Hohenester, a postdoctoral fellow at Birkbeck,
      to solve the structure of a decameric complex of SAP with a bound ligand,
      2'-deoxyadenosine-5'-mono-phosphate (dAMP), was undertaken at Birkbeck
      (and written up and published after Wood left in 1996) [3]. This
      novel structure for the SAP-ligand complex showed the calcium sites
      shielded against competing ligands and illustrated that the modest
      affinity of this protein for small ligands could be enhanced by
      cooperativity between the subunits of a complex. This cooperativity in
      ligand binding was utilised in the discovery of the candidate drug
      molecule CPHPC, discussed below. Wood and his co-workers originally
      speculated that knowledge of the binding mode of SAP to calcium and to
      carbohydrate- and phosphate-containing compounds might lead to the
      development of drugs to treat amyloidosis by modulating SAP binding to
      amyloid and hence amyloid's proteolytic digestion. In work started at
      Birkbeck, his group later published the structure of SAP bound to a
      carbohydrate ligand, confirming many of these speculations [4].
    Wood has continued his productive work on amyloid proteins after leaving
      Birkbeck, first at Southampton and then at UCL. He is now a Professor in
      the Centre for Amyloidosis and Acute Phase Proteins, Division of Medicine,
      University College London, and he continues to collaborate with his former
      colleagues at Birkbeck as a core member of the ISMB. His current work
      builds upon the work described above, including targeting the related
      PTX-1C-reactive protein for new treatments for myocardial infarction and
      stroke.
    