CaseStudyId: 36837
Title: 
    Interactive architectural innovation in practice, products and
          business formation
    

ImpactDetails

    The UCL research has underpinned the development of original artistic and
      cultural artefacts that
      are valued highly by both the public and private sectors, and which are
      making an important
      contribution to the global profile of British innovation in architecture
      and design. Although
      impossible to quantify, it has nonetheless delivered significant financial
      impacts via its influence on
      major projects by leading architectural practices, as well as on the
      formation of innovative young
      design studios. The following examples illustrative some of the ways in
      which the research has
      underpinned these important outcomes:
    (i) Contributions to major architectural projects: The research
      has supported the delivery of
      major architectural projects run by some of the UK's best known
      architectural and design
      practitioners, including globally renowned London practice, Wilkinson Eyre
      Architects, which has
      twice won the RIBA Stirling Prize (2001, 2002). Several of the company's
      110 staff (including
      former BIAW researcher Matthew Potter, now an Associate Director) identify
      Gage's research as
      an important influence, and core elements of that research are evident in
      some of the company's
      biggest projects. Thus its environmentally responsive conservatories for
      `Gardens by the Bay'
      (Singapore's iconic park) deployed a tiered approach to energy-use by
      using shades responsive to
      their local climate conditions to regulate the building's internal thermal
      levels. This use of solar
      responsive technologies reflects the insights published in [c],
      and Wilkinson Eyre acknowledges
      the direct influence of Gage's research legacy upon projects such as these
      [1].
    Flanagan Lawrence (formerly BFLS Architects) likewise cites the influence
      of the research on work
      such as their [text removed for publication] Soundforms project in
      Cardiff, completed in 2011. The
      work done here on sound and performance by the Associate Director of
      Flanagan Lawrence, a
      former BIAW researcher, fed directly into the Cardiff scheme, wherein `adaptive
        technologies and
        digital prototyping were used for the development of the acoustic
        panels' and `generative software
        was used to optimise the layout and position of the panels to meet the
        acoustic requirements' [2].
    (ii) Formation of innovative design studios producing original
        artistic and cultural artefacts:
      Gage's work has catalysed the institution of numerous commercially and
      artistically successful
      design firms. The influence of BIAW research on interactive, responsive
      and performative
      architectural design is much in evidence in the work of the these
      companies, with most of them
      specialising in the development of responsive architectural elements such
      as interactive facades,
      modulated lighting and motion-sensing components, and in the provision of
      immersive and large-
      scale landscape installations for public and private clients. The
      resultant designs are finding favour
      among consumers in both the public and private sectors, and in doing so
      are contributing directly
      to the global profile of British innovation in architectural design.
    Jason Bruges Studio was established in 2001 partly to commercialise BIAW
      research techniques,
      especially vision systems, low-cost actuation and control
      hardware/software, and digital prototype
      fabrication. The company, which now employs more than 20 staff, has
      deployed these techniques
      in international projects and installations [text removed for publication]
      between 2008-13, including
      the development of the changing lighting facade on the W Hotel in
      Leicester Square (2010) and an
      installation for San Diego International Airport, USA (2012). The
      influence of the research is
      explicitly acknowledged by the firm, who state: `The research
        environment, both in the Bartlett
        Interactive Architecture Workshop and the Bartlett Digital Fabrication
        Workshop, has had a
        considerable impact on the success of the Jason Bruges Studio' [3].
      The extent of this influence on
      Bruges, who worked for many years alongside Gage, is evident in Ariel
        Dynamics, an interactive
      sound-and-light `bubble', fully immersive installation developed for the
      2012 Olympics Park.
      Commissioned by Coca-Cola, Ariel Dynamics used people-tracking LED
      sensors in 180
      polypropylene `bubbles' responding to the `chink' of glasses. Its design
      was underpinned by Gage's
      research on social cybernetics and agent-based responsivity, and was
      described by the firm as `a
        practical substantiation of the arguments put forward by Prof Gage in
        his paper, "The Wonder of
        Trivial Machines"' [3].
    It likewise underpinned the establishment in 2003 of Haque Design +
      Research Ltd by another
      former BIAW member, Usman Haque. The practice has since developed
      cutting-edge,
      experimental interactive architectural designs incorporating responsive
      environments, interactive
      components, digital interface devices, and mass-participation initiatives.
      Expertise developed
      within the BIAW allows Haque to employ technologies including wearable
      computing, mobile
      connectivity, people-centred design, and ubiquitous `cloud' computing. The
      company's director
      acknowledges `the considerable contribution that the research
        environment of ... the Bartlett
        Interactive Architecture Workshop has had in the development and success
        of my design practice
        ... In cultivating a forum for radically new, but explicitly practical,
        approaches in architecture [it] has
        particularly influenced my work on `open source architecture' [4].
    Sixteen* makers are an experimental architectural practice with a
      particular interest in `design
      through making', where the nature and properties of materials combine with
      a site's environmental
      conditions to inform their design process and eventually produce
      `responsive architecture'. Phil
      Ayres drew on the research in producing the experimental sixteen* makers
      installation called 55/02
      in Kielder Forest, Northumbria (2009). Designed and built with Nick
      Callicott, Chris Leung and
      Professor Bob Sheil (co-owner of sixteen* makers and Director of
      Architectural Technology at the
      Bartlett), 55/02 used environmental sensing to explore principles of
      site-specificity and adaptive
      behaviour. The influence of Gage's work on interactive technologies,
      feedback systems,
      performative elements and time-based architecture is evident in the use in
      55/02 of sophisticated
      environmental sensory devices to respond to its environment and to weather
      conditions [d].
    (iii) Impacts on culture, well-being and the economy: The
      production of original artistic and
      cultural artefacts by companies founded on or using UCL research has
      important benefits to
      cultural life, not just in the UK but also in the many countries around
      the world where those projects
      are realised. Some of those projects, moreover, deliver significant
      additional benefits, including
      supporting improved health and wellbeing. The Nature Trail by Jason Bruges
      Studio, completed in
      2012 for the new Morgan Stanley Clinical Building at Great Ormond Street
      Hospital (GOSH),
      London, provides one notable example. This interactive `wallpaper'
      installation was designed
      specifically to support the `patient journey' from ward to theatre for
      children aged 6 months to 18
      years. The installation drew heavily on Gage's research into the ways in
      which design can be
      `environmentally' responsive to its local conditions, and through which
      interactive and responsive
      architectures can enhance the user's well-being [a, b].
      Synthesised in uniquely accessible, child-
      centred graphic wallpaper, patients, parents and health-workers are able
      to find responsive LED
      image-panels of animals that are `hidden' in the `natural canvas' of the
      wood, allowing young
      patients to be fascinated and distracted during their stay in hospital [5].
    In some cases, projects generated using the research have delivered very
      significant economic
      benefits. Recent examples include Pachube, an open-source, real-time
      environmental data
      infrastructure and online community designed by Haque Design + Research
      between 2009 and
      2011.The software allows individuals to store, share and discover
      real-time sensor, energy and
      environment data from objects, devices and buildings around the world
      through the internet of
      things &#8212; a globally online network of tools and gadgets. Key
      characteristics of the software were
      informed by Gage's work on low-cost local actuated-environmental
      monitoring, human-to-computer
      and open-source enabled design [c, d]. The Director of the firm
      specifically acknowledged the
      influence of this work on the development of Pachube [6]. In 2011
      the software (now rebranded as
      Xively) was sold as a $15m spin-off company to LogMeIn to support its
      cloud services; by July
      2013, more than seven million devices have been connected using Pachube
      technology.
    (iv) Contribution to the global profile of British innovation in
        architecture and design: The
      use of the research by established architectural practices has allowed
      their delivery since 2008 of
      some of the best and most innovative design in the world. Wilkinson Eyre's
      `Gardens by the Bay'
      project won the 2012 World Architecture Festival `World Building of the
      Year', whilst Flanagan
      Lawrence's Soundforms took four top architectural awards in 2012: RIBA
      Design Award, RIBA
      Welsh Award, Best Welsh Building, and Welsh Client of the Year. In the
      same year, this project
      was also mid-listed for the RIBA Stirling Prize and at the World
      Architecture Festival.
    The innovation and quality of the designs produced by new companies
      founded on or making
      extensive use of the UCL research has also been widely acknowledged
      nationally and
      internationally since 2008 through prestigious awards. Awards to Jason
      Bruges Studio include the
      Design Museum's 2012 `Design of the Year' award and the Brit Insurance
      Design of the Year
      Award in 2010 and 2011. Haque Design + Research have won prizes including
      the Design
      Museum's 2008 Interactive Design of the Year Award; the 2008-09 Wellcome
      Trust Sci-Art Award;
      the Swiss Creation Prize; Japan Media Arts Festival Excellence Prize; and
      Asia Digital Art Award
      Grand Prize. Sixteen* makers' 55/02 installation also won a 2011 RIBA
      National Design Award.
    
ImpactSummary

    Gage's research in interactive architecture since the 1990s has
      influenced the working methods of
      a sizeable community of SME architectural and environmental design
      practices, mainly in London,
      and in some cases significantly extended the scope of their services. The
      research has established
      and strengthened innovative exchange between academia, professions and
      creative industries and
      led to the creation of a number of new specialist and award-winning design
      companies with
      international profiles. One of these developed intellectual property sold
      in 2011 for over $15m,
      while another won a RIBA National Award for design excellence in
      collaboration with Bartlett staff.
    
UnderpinningResearch

    Stephen Gage, Professor of Innovative Technology &#8212; who joined the UCL
      Bartlett School of
      Architecture in 1990 and was Director of Technology from 1990-2009 -
      established the Bartlett
      Interactive Architecture Workshop (BIAW) in 1995. The BIAW focuses on
      interactive technologies
      as subjects of investigation in their own right and their use for creating
      innovative architecture.
      Taking its cues from systems theory, cybernetics, behavioural analysis and
      performative design,
      Gage's research has elucidated a continuous design feedback between
      digital and physical
      iterations. This has informed the work of commercial design studios such
      as Wilkinson Eyre
      (Matthew Potter), Flanagan Lawrence (Paul Bavister), Haque Design and
      Research (Usman
      Haque), Jason Bruges Studios (Jason Bruges, Dave DiDuca, Richard Roberts),
      Sixteen Makers*
      (Chris Leung); and led to collaborations with researchers now at the Arhus
      School of Architecture
      (Phil Ayres was employed until 2001 as a researcher in the BIAW team),
      McLean and Silver
      Westminster (Will McLean and Peter Silver, also previously at the
      Architectural Association), and
      Ruairi Glynn. There are two strands to the research that underpins the
      impacts described here:
    (i) Responsive behaviour, interactivity and performance. BIAW's
      work is predicated on the
      notion of architecture as time-based, thus changing its form and behaviour
      rather than being static
      and fixed. As such, the people and objects in the built environment can be
      regarded as performers,
      especially where the behaviour of those objects is also subject to change
      over time. Against this
      backdrop, BIAW research has explored and demonstrated the importance of
      analysing responsive
      behaviour, particularly in order to understand the differences between
      simulated virtual systems
      and the lived behaviour of occupants whose engagement with their
      environment is largely haptic.
      This is treated as vital to conceptualising the immediate, localised
      responses of dynamic
      architectural elements or systems to their external environment or
      patterns of internal occupation.
    These innovative theoretical ideas were applied in Gage's 2006
      exploration of human observers'
      appreciation of two responsive and interactive installations, `The Wonder
      of Trivial Machines' and
      `Edge Monkeys' [a]. The theme of performance was developed further
      in a 2009 paper by Gage
      exploring notions of the temporary and permanent in interactive design [b].
      The research also
      considers the ways in which constructed environments can `observe' and
      respond to users' needs,
      in turn catalysing performativity contingent on those observed needs and
      responses.
    (ii) Innovative design practice. Understanding differences between
      simulated and actual
      behaviour is especially relevant in design, where the observer's
      engagement is haptic and the
      virtual observer's descriptions are inevitably partial and incomplete.
      Work on interactive
      technologies and innovative design practice is founded particularly on
      research led by Gage
      between 1998 and 2001, funded by the Department of Trade and Industry,
      which examined the
      innovative use of micro-controllers and internal environmental monitoring
      in the design and control
      of `top down' ventilation in urban areas [c]. Gage's second
      approach during this period investigated
      the transitory and experiential possibilities of interactive architecture.
      Conducted in collaboration
      with Pete Silver, this research extended Silver's earlier work with John
      Fraser and Gordon Pask at
      the Architectural Association on cybernetic and performative interests;
      the resulting `aesthetically
      potent environments' (Pask) showed how occupants' delight informs our
      experience of buildings.
    In combination, these ideas put forward by Gage and BIAW colleagues have
      underpinned the
      exploration of the capacity for accessible, low-cost digital equipment for
      sensing, computation and
      actuation to produce beneficial short circuits in the design process [d].
      The research has
      demonstrated that working directly with new responsive technologies allows
      architects and
      designers not only to create projects with time-based features, but also
      to produce innovative
      software with significant marketing potential. Gage's most recent research
      focuses on the
      relationship between active facades and interior occupancy, and the
      possibilities for delivering
      innovative, interactive, indeterminate architecture in the context of
      environmental sustainability.
    Both of the two main research strands came together in papers presented
      at the Digital Creativity
      Conference (2000) which examined human delight in, and recognition of,
      physical and logical
      patterns in designed environments. They have also informed the research
      conducted and
      published by Phil Ayres (2001-2003) [e], and, in the case of Usman
      Haque, supporting the
      production of his spectacular installations Scents of Space (2002)
      and Sky Ear (2005).
    