CaseStudyId: 36904
Title: 
    Space Syntax: improving national and international urban
          environments
    

ImpactDetails

    (i) Contributions to and impacts arising from the transformation of UK
        Public Spaces:
    Projects by SSLtd, underpinned by the UCL research work described above,
      have informed the local plans, strategies and planning application
      processes of important projects for more than ten local authorities in the
      UK. By creating a more robust and evidence-informed planning process, the
      research has made a significant contribution to the success of those
      projects, each of which affects many thousands of local constituents [2].
      It has also supported the efficient and successful delivery of more than
      50 private-led developments in the UK, including Camden Market (with
      Chelsfield Partners and MAKE Architects, then AHMM), and Elizabeth House
      (with Chelsfield Partners and Chelsfield Partners) [3].
    The regenerative and economic impacts of our contributions to the
      redevelopment of UK public spaces are well demonstrated in the case of Old
      Market Square, Nottingham. Work started in 2003 on this &#163;7 million
      Nottingham City Council project to transform a dysfunctional and
      problematic urban space, which is used annually by more than 5 million
      local residents and visitors to the city.
    The redevelopment of this high traffic, politically sensitive, and
      historically listed area drew particularly on UCL research for strategic
      design recommendations, pedestrian movement forecasts and detailed spatial
      analysis. In particular, the project's success relied heavily on the
      ability to deliver static space occupancy, since a space that only
      supported movement would fail to meet the key objectives of increasing
      interpersonal communication and transactions within the Old Market Square.
      The square, which is now the centrepiece of Nottingham's regeneration
      efforts, reopened to the public in 2007. It has since won multiple awards
      recognising it as one of the most successful public spaces in the UK,
      including three Civic Trust awards in 2008 for which it beat a shortlist
      of 100 contenders [4]. The redesign of this previously
      relentlessly underperforming historic area has significantly diversified
      and increased its usage. Thus, for example, it now hosts an annual `German
      Market' in December, and is also transformed during the summer into the
      `Nottingham Riviera', as well as hosting myriad short-term events
      throughout the year. The new design and subsequent diversification of the
      Old Market Square's use has supported increased footfall through the area:
      in the twelve months to the end of April 2012, Nottingham saw a 0.9%
      increase in footfall compared to the rest of the East Midlands, which
      declined by 2.5%, and compared with footfall in UK towns and cities more
      broadly, which declined by an average of 2% during the same period [5].
      These changes helped support local shops and restaurants, a contribution
      that has been particularly important during the recession. The redesigned
      square has also brought significant cultural benefits to Nottingham,
      improving the image of the city and contributing to the preservation of
      national heritage as a lived environment. Writing in June 2008, the
      Business Correspondent of the Nottingham Evening Post summarised
      some of the benefits that the redeveloped Square had brought to the city,
      by saying: `Only the churlish would fail to acknowledge the difference
        that the multi-million investment in the Old Market Square has made to
        the heart of our city. While it may take some time in the current
        circumstances, there is little doubt that this is an investment that
        will, in the long run, pay for itself. It hosts events, it showcases the
        city, it brings in visitors, it is a place where people gather. People
        spend money in Nottingham's city centre economy as a direct result of
        the square's enhanced presence.' [6]
    (ii) Contributions to and impacts arising from urban masterplanning
          in Jeddah:
    Further afield, the space syntax team has achieved significant
      international impacts through research in Jeddah. This began with the 2006
      commissioning of SSLtd by the Jeddah Municipality to provide spatial
      development strategies for the city, the population of which had increased
      from 2 million in 1993 to 3.2 million at the last census in 2010. The
      SSLtd project, Strategic Planning Framework, has made a vital
      contribution to planning and decision-making processes affecting the whole
      city, including the redevelopment of large and highly populous areas of
      unplanned settlement [7]. It also led to a series of further high
      profile projects led by SSLtd, including the development in 2008-09 of the
      masterplan for the City Centre of Jeddah, a 500-hectare area in the heart
      of the city incorporating both its historic core (Al-Balad) and its
      waterfront area. Although the project is yet to be implemented, the SSLtd
      masterplan has already had profound impacts on planning and resource
      allocation in Jeddah.
    Space syntax research into natural movement and the movement economy [a-d],
      when repeated in the quite different cultural and environmental context of
      Saudi Arabia, has shown that the principles not only also apply there, but
      that they can account for the land use and movement patterns even in
      Jeddah's unplanned settlements. This has allowed the development of
      evidence- based policy tools to support the municipality's primary
      socio-economic regeneration objectives, as well as the reintegration of
      the historic city centre into the vastly expanded context [e].
    Since 2008, SSLtd has been working with the Municipality of Jeddah and
      Jeddah Development and Urban Regeneration Company (JDURC) on six projects
      &#8212; with a total consultancy value in excess of &#163;1.5m &#8212; to develop
      regeneration strategies and development plans for more than 50 such areas
      of unplanned settlement with an estimated total population of 1 million.
      These unplanned settlements suffer from multiple urban, social and
      economic problems, and are considered the most challenging areas for
      improvement in Jeddah. Using an analytical, evidence- based approach [e],
      SSLtd has developed prioritisation strategies, spatial designs, financial
      models and adaptable and interchangeable regeneration scenarios ranging
      from minimum intervention to full redevelopment. These plans are being
      used by the communities themselves, as well as by local authorities and
      private sector organisations, to transform Jeddah's unplanned settlements
      and enhance socio-economic conditions therein [7]. They have
      particularly informed the Draft Strategic Plan of Jeddah,
      published for consultation in 2010. This plan was revised in 2013 by AECOM
      (a global provider of professional technical and management support
      services) along with SSLtd on the basis of consultations in Jeddah, and
      will be adopted soon.
    The same projects are also informing a two-year planning mega project
      commissioned in February 2013 to inform the development of Jeddah
      Sub-regional, Structural and Local Plans [7]. Its consultancy fees
      alone exceed &#163;8million, &#163;1.2m of which goes to SSLtd. In collaboration
      with AECOM, SSLtd's contribution to that project includes analytical
      models of the city providing the basis for the precedent studies, baseline
      research, option assessment and option development at all scales of the
      project. The project will produce city plans for the next 20 years,
      affecting millions of current and future residents of Jeddah and
      accounting for the use of billions of Saudi Riyals. Although its full
      implementation will take a long time, the impact of SSLtd research on the
      project is already emerging. The city's department of unplanned settlement
      is currently using the SSLtd plans to issue planning permissions in 25
      unplanned settlements with a total population of over 500,000 [7].
      Following SSLtd recommendations, all categories of unplanned settlements
      have been designated to specific authorities or public-private partnership
      companies for further actions. The JDURC started the physical
      transformation of two of these areas (Al-Ruwais and Khozam) in 2011 and is
      now moving on to work on another six areas. The municipality of Jeddah has
      also started physical interventions based on SSLtd's recommendations in
      another eight central areas, including the highly populated areas of
      Al-Balad, Betrumin and Qulail. These projects will enhance the
      accessibility of the communities to wider economic and social
      opportunities in Jeddah [7].
    Space syntax research has, moreover, already generated more widespread
      international impacts through its development of an evidence-based,
      analytical approach to addressing some of the problems faced by those
      living in unplanned and informal settlements. The significance of this
      methodology is acknowledged by its inclusion in important international
      policy documents including UNICEF's 2012 report on The State of the
        World's Children 2012: Children in an Urban World [8].
    Both of the examples outlined here demonstrate the global reach and
      significance of UCL's world- leading space syntax research, the impacts of
      which include benefits to the UK economy through export, and to the
      quality of life of local populations both at home and abroad. The research
      has also prompted increased public awareness of, and an interest in, the
      issues it considers. It is an interest demonstrated, for example, by its
      inclusion in the 2012 Olympic Games opening ceremony as one of Danny
      Boyle's many allusions to seminal UK research innovations [9].
    
ImpactSummary

    This case study describes impacts arising from pioneering UCL space
      syntax research by Hillier, Penn et al, funded principally by the EPSRC.
      Impacts have been achieved particularly through the establishment and
      subsequent activities of a technology transfer spin-out company, Space
      Syntax Limited (SSLtd), which works closely with UCL researchers to
      provide strategic, evidence-based consulting services in architectural and
      urban design, planning, transport and property development. Since 2008,
      SSLtd has informed the development of 147 projects in the UK and 73
      projects abroad. The impacts of these projects, along with over 400 others
      undertaken before 2008, include significant and measurable economic,
      social and environmental improvement to urban environments in the UK and
      internationally, with important follow-on impacts on the quality of
      citizens' lives.
    
UnderpinningResearch

    Space syntax, which was pioneered between the mid-1970s and 1990s by Professor Bill
        Hillier and colleagues at UCL's
      Bartlett School of Architecture, is a human-focused theory based on
      empirical observations and methods for representing and measuring the
      pattern properties of built space. It allows the treatment of spatial
      configuration as a variable in the analysis of the socio-economic
      function, cultural significance and behavioural implications of spatial
      design. This includes patterns of movement, awareness and interaction;
      density, land use and land value; urban growth and societal
      differentiation; and safety and crime distribution, whether in
      contemporary or historical contexts. To the degree that analysis of
      spatial configuration can account for observed functional or behavioural
      outcomes, these theories can be used predictively to assess likely
      functional behaviour and early-stage design options, and thus inform
      strategic design.
    The relationship between the Space Group in UCL and SSLtd is intimate.
      Theories and analytical methods developed in the lab are tested against
      data provided by live projects in the company. These live projects give
      rise to questions that challenge theory, regularly testing theory by
      finding anomalies that need to be accounted for. This then drives
      innovation in both theory and method. All the while the applications are
      those that clients are prepared to pay and provide data for since they
      matter to their business, while various UK Research Councils have
      recognised the scientific value that this brings, by giving continuous
      support to space syntax research since the 1980s.
    This case study focuses on those aspects of the research relevant to two
      examples of impact: the design of well used public open space, and
      large-scale urban masterplanning. There are three relevant research
      findings: the theory of natural movement [a, b]; the theory of the
      movement economy [e]; and findings about `static' space use in
      public open space [c, e]. Briefly, space syntax research from the
      mid-1980s to early-90s mainly tried to understand how street layout
      configuration affected pedestrian and vehicular movement. Research
      projects funded by the SERC and EPSRC found that traffic flows in both
      modes consistently correlate with measures of network accessibility. By
      studying homogeneous residential as well as mixed-use
      commercial/residential areas, it was possible to show the fundamental
      causal effect of the street layout on urban movement; this `foot-fall' in
      turn attracted non-residential land uses, which then attracted further
      pedestrian and vehicular movement in a `multiplier effect' [a].
      Secondly, the theory of the movement economy showed how urban land use
      patterns evolve to achieve a structured mixing of uses in historic and
      unplanned settlements, locating land uses on streets in densities
      appropriate to their accessibility. Finally, detailed studies of public
      open space showed how the movement network gave rise to patterns of static
      space use in urban squares, contributing to vibrant urban life, while
      accounting for the reverse where planners failed to provide the required
      conditions [b].
    Space syntax has for a long time sought to test out its theories against
      practical live applications. In the 1980s it worked pro-bono on projects
      for local tenants groups on public housing estates subject to development
      proposals (e.g. Mozart and Maiden Lane Estates, Coin Street), carrying out
      analysis and observations in order to give voice to tenants concerns at
      public consultations and planning inquiries. In 1986 UCL's space syntax
      team was commissioned by Rosehaugh Stanhope PLC to advise on their
      competition scheme for the Kings Cross Railway Lands, subsequently going
      on to advise on the later phases of the Broadgate development, Paternoster
      Square and Peter Palumbo's Mansion House Square scheme. During the 1990s
      it advised London's South Bank Centre on schemes for the regeneration of
      that area, and on the Millennium Bridge scheme which links St Paul's to
      the Tate Modern, and on the `World Squares for All' scheme to reintegrate
      the heart of Trafalgar Square into the urban life of London's West End.
      According to the Department of Transport, the immediate effects of the
      Trafalgar Square redevelopment, completed in 2003, were profound.
      Improvements included a 250% increase in pedestrian activity; a 900%
      increase in its use as a pedestrian through-route; and transformed public
      perceptions of Trafalgar Square as a destination. In total, an estimated
      8,000 user installations of space syntax software have been made worldwide
      to date, with a sharp rise after the code was open-sourced. All these
      factors serve as the research background for the various impacts within
      the REF period outlined below.
    The space syntax research was led by Professor Bill Hillier (Senior
      Lecturer, Reader, then Professor; at UCL since 1974); Professor Alan Penn
      (Lecturer, Senior Lecturer, Reader then Professor; at UCL since 1989); and
      Kayvan Karimi (Senior Lecturer; joined UCL in 2009).
    