CaseStudyId: 36901
Title: 
    Hereditary autoinflammatory disease programme: from endogenous pyrogen
      to the NHS cryopryin associated periodic syndrome (CAPS) Treatment Service
      at UCL, Royal Free
      Hospital.
    

ImpactDetails

    Canakinumab was licensed for the treatment of CAPS, a new highly
      effective medicine for a rare
      orphan disease, in the EU [a] and the US in 2009 and in Japan in
      2011 [b]. Data for licensing
      arose principally from the clinical trials led by Hawkins.
    The NHS CAPS Treatment Service, established in 2010 as a result of
      Hawkins' research, and
      funded directly by the Department of Health, provides the national service
      for patients with
      autoinflammatory diseases, offering a clinical and genetic diagnostic
      service, and highly effective
      treatment with specific cytokine inhibitors [c]. Fifty patients
      with CAPS are currently receiving
      canakinumab treatment in the UK centre, at an annual cost of &#163;3.6m, and
      nearly 300 patients are
      now being treated world-wide, 234 of whom have CAPS and the remainder
      having other
      autoinflammatory diseases [d].
    An international registry to document the safety and efficacy of
      canakinumab has been created [e],
      to which Hawkins contributed design and serves as a member of the steering
      committee. Among
      the 241 CAPS patients enrolled on the registry, only two have discontinued
      treatment due to poor
      therapeutic response.
    CAPS-causing mutations result in excessive production of interleukin
      103b2 (IL-103b2), which causes
      disabling multi-system inflammation from birth. Patients suffer severe
      fatigue, fever and muscle
      pains on a daily basis that mimic influenza, many symptoms of which are
      also caused by excessive
      IL-1&#946; clinical features include chronic anaemia and inflammation in the
      skin, eyes, joints and brain
      that presents as rashes, conjunctivitis, arthritis, chronic meningitis,
      blindness, deafness and in
      some cases cognitive impairment. About 25% of patients develop AA
      amyloidosis that results in
      kidney failure and death within 5-10 years. Growth and development are
      impaired, and puberty is
      delayed as a result of chronic severe inflammation. Patients with CINCA,
      the most severe CAPS
      phenotype, often die before adulthood.
    Treatment of CAPS with the monoclonal IL-103b2 antibody, canakinumab,
      results in complete or near-complete
      remission of the disabling inflammation that affects the skin, eyes,
      joints and brain and
      causes the major flu-like symptoms and fevers. The overwhelming fatigue
      that impedes
      employment and social activities is abolished, corroborated in clinical
      studies through normalisation
      of the SF-36 quality of life and FACIT-F&#169; fatigue scores. In
      the long term, there is every
      expectation that continued treatment with canakinumab will prevent the
      skeletal deformities,
      blindness, deafness and amyloidosis that commonly occur. Catch-up growth
      and age-appropriate
      sexual maturation have been observed in adolescents with CAPS who have
      been treated with
      canakinumab.
    Feedback from patients treated with canakinumab [f] includes:
    "I could not have imagined such a change in fortune due to this
        drug..."
    "My whole body ached, I had difficulty walking and had to be carried
        to bed. I missed a lot
        of school with severe headaches, and could not even have a bath due to
        the rash. I cannot
        believe the effect of this drug, my symptoms have completely
        disappeared."
    "My joints and whole body would swell right up, and I would itch until
        I would bleed, and had
        terrible migraines. I am now NORMAL!!!"
    "My joint inflammation and pains have completely disappeared"
    "My daughter had terrible headaches, conjunctivitis, and rashes, and
        was hardly able to get
        of bed. She was shunned at school, and put in a remedial class. It got
        so bad she took an
        overdose. After the drug all the symptoms vanished; she is happy and
        alive for the first
        time, and is now working and has her first boyfriend at 20 years old!"
    "Joints were excruciating, and now the symptoms have disappeared"
    "The effects have been absolutely life changing for me".
    "This is a wonder drug".
    
ImpactSummary

    The UCL Centre for Amyloidosis and Acute Phase Proteins has identified
      the cause and treatment
      for the prototypical cryopryin associated periodic syndrome (CAPS), and
      subsequently for a range
      of other hereditary and acquired autoinflammatory disorders. As a result
      of the research,
      canakinumab was licensed for this condition. In recognition, NHS
      Specialised Services
      commissioned the UK CAPS Treatment Service in 2010 to deliver
      life-changing IL-1 blocking
      therapy to the national caseload of CAPS patients at UCL.
    
UnderpinningResearch

    The notion of autoinflammatory diseases, i.e. chronic multisystem
      inflammatory disorders without
      evidence of cell-mediated or humoral autoimmunity, emerged with the
      molecular characterisation
      in the late 1990s of two monogenic inherited periodic fever syndromes,
      familial Mediterranean
      fever (FMF) and the TNF-associated periodic syndrome (TRAPS), both of
      which are frequently
      complicated by the development of reactive systemic (AA) amyloidosis,
      causing renal failure and
      early death.
    Professor Philip Hawkins and Dr Helen Lachmann began to characterise the
      phenotype of patients
      referred to the NHS National Amyloidosis Centre with AA amyloidosis of
      undetermined
      inflammatory aetiology in the late 1990s. They identified patients in whom
      there was evidence of
      familial autoinflammatory disease, notably including those conforming to
      the description of Muckle-Wells
      syndrome, a rare disorder characterised by urticarial rash, aching limbs,
      hearing loss and
      amyloidosis. In collaboration with Dr Michael McDermott at Bart's and the
      London, they performed
      a genome wide genetic linkage study during 2000 in an Indian family with
      Muckle-Wells syndrome,
      and identified a defect in the NLRP3 (formerly NALP3) gene, which was
      reported simultaneously
      by a US group to be associated with familial cold urticaria, an apparently
      different, less severe
      hereditary inflammatory disease [1]. Hawkins and Lachmann
      undertook a collaborative study with
      Professor Jurg Tschopp in Lausanne through 2001-03, which demonstrated
      increased activity of
      mutated NLRP3 in the interleukin-1 (IL-1) processing inflammasome pathway
      in myelomonocytic
      cells, suggesting that excessive IL-1 production may contribute to the
      pathogenesis of the disease
      [4]. Hawkins' team firmly validated IL-1 as a therapeutic target in
      patients with NLRP3 mutations in
      2003 through the reverse translational approach by demonstrating rapid and
      complete remission of
      Muckle-Wells syndrome complicated by advanced amyloidosis following
      treatment with
      recombinant IL-1 receptor antagonist [2,3].
    Further genetic and clinical phenotyping studies by Hawkins and Lachmann
      confirmed that Muckle-Wells
      syndrome, familial cold urticaria (now known as familial cold
      autoinflammatory syndrome)
      and the apparently sporadic very severe congenital disorder known as
      chronic infantile
      neurological, cutaneous and articular syndrome (CINCA) constituted a
      continuous spectrum of
      inflammatory disease caused by mutations in NLRP3 (now also known as
      cyropyrin). They
      subsequently collaborated with Novartis from 2004 to 2009, resulting in
      the development of a fully
      humanised monoclonal anti-IL-103b2 antibody, canakinumab, which they
      demonstrated produces near
      complete resolution of inflammatory disease activity in virtually all
      patients with CAPS, and which
      they have latterly shown also has high efficacy in other acquitted and
      hereditary autoinflammatory
      disorders including TRAPS. Proof of concept clinical studies [5],
      followed by a pivotal randomised
      controlled trial of canakinumab in CAPS led by Hawkins, resulted in the
      approval of this new
      biologic agent for this orphan indication in the US and EU [6],
      and Phase II/III studies are now
      underway in patients with TRAPS.
    Further translational studies have shown that inappropriate acute or
      chronic activation of the innate
      immune system, mediated substantially by IL-1, contributes to many other
      acquired chronic
      disorders, ranging from rare entities such as Schnitzler syndrome, to
      numerous very common
      conditions potentially including diabetes mellitus, atherosclerosis and
      asthma
    This work was recognised by the NHS National Specialised Services, the
      national organisation
      responsible for the commissioning of highly specialised clinical services
      (formerly the National
      Commissioning Group), in supporting a national diagnostic and management
      advisory service for
      inherited `fever' disorders as part of the NHS National Amyloidosis Centre
      in 1999, and
      subsequently the UK CAPS Treatment Service in 2010 to deliver highly
      effective IL-1 blocking
      therapy to the national caseload of CAPS patients.
    