CaseStudyId: 36931
Title: 
    Reduction in UK carbon emissions through use of white light for street
        lighting
    

ImpactDetails

    Street lighting is a massive infrastructural undertaking that uses a lot
      of energy. In the UK in 2005, there were 8.12 million lighting points on
      the country's streets using approximately 3.14 TWH of electricity, which
      gave rise to CO2 emissions of 1.32 megatons [1]. Of
      these 8.12 million lighting points, 6.31 million of them were street
      lights while the rest comprised sign illuminations or lit bollards &#8212;
      furthermore, by 2012 the number of street lights in the UK had increased
      to about 6.9 million in total [2]. Whilst of course street
      lighting is only one of many users of energy, it is a highly visible case,
      and with the rise in environmental concerns so many pressures began to
      grow on local authorities to reduce the level of public lighting so as to
      save energy. However, on the other hand, a higher amount of street
      lighting provides many important benefits related to crime prevention and
      public safety. This is where the innovative Bartlett research work by
      Raynham et al proved to be so useful. By showing that white lights with
      lower illuminance had the same benefits as brighter sodium lights, the
      research thereby provided an opportunity to maintain the clear social and
      public safety benefits of high amounts of street lighting &#8212; for
      pedestrians and motorists alike &#8212; but with a concomitant reduction in
      energy use by as much as 30-40% and with a resultant drop in greenhouse
      gas emissions estimated at 45.5 megatons in the UK in 2012.
    Change in British Standards on street lighting:
    In 2003, the British Standard (BS) for street lighting, Code of
        practice for the design of road lighting &#8212; Part 1: Lighting of roads and
        public amenity areas (BS 5489-1: 2003), was published [3].
      Drawing directly on research findings [a] that had been published
      in The Lighting Journal to coincide with the deliberations leading
      up to the revision of the code, the reissued standards gave revised
      guidance on the selection of lighting classes for subsidiary roads.
    In particular, it permitted the selection of a lower lighting class, as
      defined in BS EN 13201-2 [4], which in turn permitted these
      subsidiary roads to be lit with white lights which used a lower
      illuminance class than those lit with the traditional orange sodium lamps.
      This meant that energy usage lighting levels could be reduced by at least
      30-40%. It should be pointed out that the Bartlett's research
      investigations outlined in Section 2 suggest that the energy needed to
      achieve the same lighting levels using white light can in fact drop by as
      much 50%; however, British Standard committees are notoriously (and
      rightly) cautious, hence the use of a slightly lower energy reduction
      figure in this case study. Nonetheless, as a result of this change in the
      codes, stimulated by the work of Raynham et al, there has since been an
      accelerating move towards white lights for street lighting. This is also
      partly attributable to the fact that since 2005 most of the major
      renovations of street lighting in the UK have been carried out using
      private finance initiative (PFI) schemes, with those in charge of those
      being keen to make savings. All of the PFI schemes started since 2006 that
      the Bartlett researchers were able to check use white light for
      residential roads, and this can be seen for example in Hampshire,
      Northamptonshire, Croydon and the London Borough of Lewisham [5].
    Increasing the uptake of white light:
    In the first few years, the uptake of white lights for street lighting
      was slow, but improvements in lamp technology soon led to the emergence of
      a range of white metal halide lamps that could take advantage of the
      changed British Standard codes. Already by 2007 &#8212; and definitely since
      then and during the entire REF 2014 impact census period &#8212; the situation
      in the UK developed to the point where virtually all new installations of
      street lighting installations were using white light.
    Totally accurate data on the UK's population of street lights is very
      hard to come by as the lights themselves are run by a number of different
      authorities, and whilst there has been significant improvement in recent
      years many of the inventories made of them, the figures are still not
      entirely reliable. The following analysis is thus based on a chart
      covering road lighting that was provided by Philips Lighting [2],
      from which data was extracted data and then confirmed in terms of general
      accuracy with that company. In many ways it is the most reliable source
      available, given that Philips is by far the largest vendor of street
      lighting lanterns in the UK. They supply both luminaires and lamps, and
      therefore have the greatest need to determine accurate data about light
      sources so that they can assess the size of the lamp replacement market.
      From this Philips data, it becomes possible to plot the rise of white
      light sources used in street lighting from 2005, when virtually none of
      them were being used, through to 2012, where they have become increasingly
      popular.

Number of street lanterns in the UK [Philips Lighting, Source 2]

    Thus the chart indicates, the use of white light has risen dramatically
      during the REF impact period, and in addition it is necessary to note that
      white LEDs have also been used for street lighting since 2009. At the same
      time, the number of lamps based on older technologies which emit orange
      light (high-pressure sodium (SON) and low-pressure sodium (SOX)) has
      reduced gradually, as the Philips chart also reveals.
    The most dramatic increase began, in fact, right at the start of the REF
      impact period. In 2008, the number of white light sources increased by
      c.260,000 units over the previous year. Since then, the use of white
      conventional lamps and white LED lighting has grown from 450,000 lighting
      units in 2008 to about 1,450,000 units in 2012, representing what is
      nearly a threefold increase.
    Energy savings and emissions reduction due to white light:
    As mentioned, this increase in the use of white lighting has had
      significant knock-on effects for the UK's energy usage and the reduction
      of carbon emissions. The orange-coloured 70W SON (high-pressure sodium
      lamp), which was for a long time the typical light source for street
      lighting, has a total circuit power of 79W, allowing for aspects such as
      gear losses [5]. This is in good correlation with the 2005 data
      which suggested an average power usage for all street lighting points of
      76.26 W, but also included relatively low powered illuminated signs and
      bollards [1].
    The most conservative estimate of the energy saved by the use of white
      light assumes that the current population of c.1,200,000 conventional
      white light lanterns has replaced the old 70W SON lanterns with an average
      energy saving of 30% on each lamp. This gives a safe figure for a
      reduction of 28.4 MW in the energy load of these streetlights. Assuming
      that each lantern is on for 4,000 hours per year, then the changeover to
      white light can be calculated to have saved the UK 113 GWh of electricity
      in 2012. This reduction also saved local authorities in the UK over &#163;10
      million in electricity costs that year, and also reduced payments
      associated with their carbon reduction commitments. Taking again a
      conservative estimate of 0.4 kg of CO2 emissions per KWh of
      electricity at night [6], this represents a total saving of 45.5
      megatons of CO2 in 2012.
    Hence the Bartlett research of Raynham et al has proved to be a major
      contributor towards helping the UK meet the EU's set target of reducing
      emissions to 20 per cent below 1990 levels by 2020. Using UK government
      figures, it is estimated that the UK's net emissions in 2012 were 479.1
      megatons of CO2 equivalent &#8212; thus it can be seen that over 9
      per cent savings in emissions were achieved through the changeover to
      white lights for street lighting [7].
    
ImpactSummary

    Research by Raynham et al has led to the adoption of white light in
      residential roads and city centres throughout the UK, enabling an energy
      saving of 30-40% while providing better quality of street lighting. As a
      result, today there are now c.1,200,000 conventional street lights with
      white light sources and a further c.220,000 LED lanterns that emit white
      light. Conservative estimates suggest that this changeover to white light
      saved 113 GWh of electricity in 2012, and thus reduced the UK emissions of
      CO2 by 45.5 megatons.
    
UnderpinningResearch

    The research was overseen and led by Professor Tadj Oreszczyn (then Head
      of the Bartlett School of Graduate Studies; and who has worked at UCL
      since 1989), and was conducted by Peter Raynham (then a Research Fellow
      and now a Senior Lecturer, and a lighting specialist who has worked at UCL
      since 1996). Raynham's work has been undertaken as part of the Light and
      Lighting research group in the Bartlett School of Graduate Studies.
    In terms of the theme of the underpinning research, it had been noted
      anecdotally that white light appeared to be better for street lighting
      than the traditionally used yellow or orange lighting, but there was no
      hard evidence. To test this idea, in 2002 researchers at the UCL Bartlett
      Faculty of the Built Environment drew upon the pioneering work of Caminada
      and van Bommel in the early 1980s, who identified facial recognition as
      important to pedestrians on the streets at night and proposed that the
      ability to recognise other people at a distance of at least four metres
      indicated an adequate level of street lighting.
    The Bartlett's research team used the same basic methodology as Caminada
      and van Bommel, asking subjects to walk towards another person until they
      could just recognise the face of that other person. At this point they
      were asked to stop and the distance was measured. However, in order that
      the research investigation could be more spatially controlled, and also
      permit rapid changes in light sources, the Bartlett study used a dummy
      street that was set up in a disused office building. Due to good relations
      with the UK's two leading lighting societies, it was possible to appeal
      for volunteers from all their members, resulting in a large number of test
      subjects with ages ranging from 16 to 70 years old. A range of light
      sources were tested, including high-pressure sodium bulbs and two types of
      compact fluorescent light sources. Each of the light sources was tested at
      least at two levels of illumination, as previously done by Caminada and
      van Bommel. For the white light fluorescent sources, very similar results
      were obtained to those reported previously by Caminada and van Bommel.
      However, through the Bartlett's research the real discovery was that, with
      high-pressure sodium bulbs, it was necessary to use significantly higher
      illuminances, with much higher energy use, to obtain the same recognition
      distance.
    The Bartlett's research was first published in 2003 in The Lighting
        Journal [a], a non-peer review journal which nonetheless has
      a very wide circulation among public lighting engineers. This was done
      deliberately to ensure that the research findings would be in the public
      domain ahead of a review of the British Standard on road lighting, which
      was just then about to be republished. The findings also formed part of an
      invited talk given by Raynham to the Society of Light and Lighting in
      2003, published subsequently in a journal essay tiled `An examination of
      the fundamentals of road lighting for pedestrians and drivers' [b].
      Raynham's paper challenged the fundamental principles of street lighting
      on main roads and suggested use of task performance in a similar manner to
      that used for pedestrian lighting. The findings of this research project,
      coupled with other parts of the Urban Lights project, were also reported
      in at a number of conferences and perhaps the best overall review of the
      work was given at Lux Europa in 2005 [c].
    The results of this research project at the UCL Bartlett, coupled with
      the continuing downward pressure on energy use in the UK, and the desire
      to reduce carbon emissions, has kick-started a much closer examination of
      the needs of pedestrians on streets at night, and work on that particular
      subject is now being undertaken by Raynham et all in the EPSRC-funded
      MERLIN project (EP/I003584/1). Its initial findings about the way in which
      pedestrians changed how they looked at the street scenes in which they
      walked around at night, as they became more concerned about the
      environmental consequences of high energy usage, were published in 2012 [d].
    