CaseStudyId: 36988
Title: 
    Energy-economic modelling of long term decarbonisation pathways:
          The policy impacts of the MARKAL-TIMES model family
    

ImpactDetails

    It is difficult to overstate the importance of having a sophisticated and
      transparent set of state-of-the-art energy systems models for proactive
      and responsive engagement with the UK policy community. Models are the
      integrating language of policy and provide the key numbers and insights
      that form the backbone of the debate and resultant policy impacts. This is
      particularly true in the highly topical and fast moving area of energy
      policy, and especially the key goals of energy system decarbonisation and
      energy security.
    The Department of Energy and Climate Change (DECC), in its 2009 UK
        Low Carbon Transition Plan [1], accepted the MARKAL elastic
      demand model's finding (as described in [d]) of the critical role
      of the electricity generation sector to enable wider decarbonisation
      efforts in buildings and transport. Resultant electricity decarbonisation
      policy mechanisms have been implemented as a key government priority with
      latest efforts being support mechanisms under Electricity Market Reform as
      legislated in the 2013 Energy Bill.
    A continuing impact of the MARKAL-TIMES modelling effort for UK
      government policy making has been in demonstrating the economic
      feasibility of decarbonisation pathways (as described in [a]),
      including the critical interplay between technological and behavioural
      change (via energy service demand reductions). UK MARKAL-TIMES has
      constituted the key technical reports on this topic for DECC's 2011 Carbon
      Plan [2].
    The quantification of electricity sector decarbonisation using MARKAL
      models is an essential enabling step to meet the targets set by the
      Committee on Climate Change (CCC). The CCC's carbon budget reports
      (2009-13) outline the framework for legislated UK carbon budgets, with
      successively commissioned MARKAL-TIMES modelling projects providing
      long-term energy and emission scenarios. In 2011, the UK government
      accepted the CCC's 4th budget period recommendation [3] for a 50%
      reduction (from 1990 levels) in carbon emissions by 2025, with
      underpinning technical appendices from the UK stochastic MARKAL model [c].
    Dr David Joffe, the Head of Modelling for the Committee on Climate
      Change, has since stated: `Since 2009, UCL's family of MARKAL/TIMES
        energy systems models have been heavily utilised by the CCC to explore
        the costs and trade-offs between different long-term decarbonisation
        pathways. This underpinning research &#8212; published in successive CCC
        reports &#8212; has been invaluable in the CCC's assessment of the appropriate
        level of the 2050 target, what this means for measures required in the
        medium term within the UK's carbon budget periods, and the policy
        framework to deliver these.'
    Placing UK decarbonisation efforts in a global context [b], the
      TIAM-UCL model provided the key underpinning technical appendix to the
      CCC's 2010 international aviation and shipping review [4], which
      advocated including international transport emissions in the UK's
      legislated carbon budgets for a fully comprehensive mitigation response to
      climate change.
    Such has been the authoritative benchmark of MARKAL-TIMES that UCL has
      been instrumental in developing complementary energy modelling tools for
      key stakeholders. This has included Strachan serving as a strategic
      advisor on the development of the ESME energy systems model of the Energy
      Technologies Institute from 2010, illustrating how UK industry has adopted
      an energy systems modelling approach. In a parallel development, Ekins and
      Strachan have successfully argued for the incorporation of cost metrics
      (derived explicitly from MARKAL) to be incorporated into the DECC
      Calculator [5] &#8212; the UK government's highly popular policy
      engagement tool, which is downloaded by 10,000 UK users each month and has
      been adapted into the nationally utilised My2050 schools classroom toolkit
      released in November 2012.
    Research has been used to provide evidence to policy makers and thus
      contribute to informed political debate. On 24 May 2011, Strachan was
      invited to give parliamentary oral evidence based on his modelling
      expertise to The UK's Energy Supply: Security or Independence
      review by the House of Commons Energy and Climate Change Select Committee.
      Following the publication of his review of modelling exercises using the
      UCL MARKAL model from 2009-2013 [6], all of which were directly
      used in policy support as discussed above, Ekins made two presentations in
      the Houses of Parliament. At the House of Commons on 26 February 2013,
      Ekins presented a paper at a UKERC policy briefing on `The UK Energy
      System in 2050: Comparing Low-Carbon, Resilient Scenarios' to a number of
      MPs and their researchers, which fed directly into the then current debate
      on the Energy Bill about the need to decarbonise the UK electricity
      system. On 1 May 2013, Ekins then presented in the House of Lords on `The
      Role of Gas in a Low-Carbon UK Energy System: Insights from Modelling',
      which has informed the current debate about the role of shale gas from
      2020 in the UK energy system.
    In terms of sub-national energy policy-making, a multi-regional version
      of the UK MARKAL model was presented to senior Scottish government and
      industry representatives on the potential role of Scotland in meeting its
      own and the wider UK's renewable energy targets, and subsequently
      submitted as supporting evidence to the Scottish Parliament's Economy
      Energy and Tourism Committee [7].
    The reach of the MARKAL-TIMES research impact extends also to
      international energy policy. As research lead on the Japan-UK research
      project on international modelling on low carbon societies, UCL led an
      international effort that contributed to the declaration and reaffirmation
      through 2009-13 of a global long term target of a 50% reduction in
      greenhouse gas emission in 2050. Furthermore the UCL team served as expert
      reviewers and contributors to the International Energy Agency's flagship
      Energy Technology Perspectives publications [8]. And on the basis
      of his research at UCL [a, c, d], Strachan was appointed as lead
      author on the `Energy System' chapter under Working Group III of the
      Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change 5th Assessment Report, with
      interim reports in 2011-12 and the final report to appear in April 2014.
    To demonstrate how UCL's systems modelling research has resulted in a
      sea-change in how the UK now funds and uses energy models to underpin
      policy making, the EPSRC has funded (as of 1 July 2013) a &#163;5.7 million
      whole energy systems modelling (wholeSEM) consortium (EP/K039326/1) as a
      centrepiece of the Research Council's energy portfolio. Furthermore, a
      memorandum of understanding was agreement in September 2013 between UCL
      and DECC to utilise UK TIMES as the principal model for long-term UK
      Government energy analysis.
    
ImpactSummary

    The family of MARKAL-TIMES energy models have successively underpinned
      every major recent UK government energy policy document on long-term
      decarbonisation pathways. Enabled by the interdisciplinary critical mass
      of the UCL Energy Institute, a ground-breaking research programme by
      Strachan, Ekins et al has taken the UK's energy systems analytical
      capacity from near zero to world-class. Specific examples of policy
      impacts include assessment of decarbonisation costs in the DECC Carbon
      Plan, and the quantification of electricity sector decarbonisation as an
      essential enabling step to meet the targets set by the Committee on
      Climate Change (CCC) in the legally adopted UK carbon budget periods.
    
UnderpinningResearch

    An interdisciplinary research team at the UCL Bartlett Faculty of the
      Built Environment Energy Institute, led by Professor Neil Strachan and
      Professor Paul Ekins (both at UCL since 2009) &#8212; with support from
      lecturers Gabrial Anandarajah (since 2009) and Ilkka Keppo (since 2011) &#8212;
      has developed the family of MARKAL-TIMES energy models. As a multi-year
      multi-person endeavour, the development, maintenance and analysis of the
      MARKAL-TIMES model has been enabled via dedicated energy systems modelling
      funding of around &#163;3 million from 2009 through to 2013. This has been
      anchored by the UK Energy Research Centre (NE\G007748\1), of which the
      Energy Systems theme has been led by Professor Paul Ekins since 2009, with
      additional sources of income from UK Research Council projects, government
      departments such as the Department of Energy &amp; Climate Change (DECC),
      statutory governmental bodies (Committee on Climate Change), regulators
      (Ofgem), energy utilities (EON, EDF), European Commission (FP7) and NGO
      funding.
    The MARKAL-TIMES model family is an integrated energy system,
      technology-rich optimisation framework. Some elements of this research
      programme &#8212; notably the model code and software interfaces &#8212; came from an
      international collaboration with a range of premier research institutes
      via an implementing agreement of the International Energy Agency (IEA).
      From 2005, Ekins and Strachan had led elsewhere the multi-institution
      development of the UK MARKAL model. Since both moving to UCL in 2009, the
      critical mass within the UCL Energy Institute enabled a step-change in the
      scope and sophistication of successive model variants, including the
      evolution from the MARKAL to the TIMES model platform, plus the
      development of UK, EU and global model versions. Furthermore, UCL's
      interdisciplinary modelling capacity allowed a range of interdisciplinary
      models to be developed to provide a rich diversity of insights. These
      insights included the interactions between technological and behavioural
      change (MARKAL Elastic Demand), geographical drivers (MARKAL-GIS),
      multi-regional impact (MARKAL England-Scotland), decision making under
      uncertainty (Stochastic MARKAL), life-cycle analysis (TIMES-LCA), and
      interactions with global drivers (ETM-UCL, TIAM-UCL).
    This ground-breaking research programme has taken the UK's energy systems
      analytical capacity to a world-class level. Key research insights emerging
      from the UCL enhancements to research are as follows:
    
      Analysis with the UK MARKAL elastic-demand model demonstrated the
        necessity of all sectors to contribute to carbon mitigation efforts,
        underscoring the value of an energy systems approach. The early and key
        role of the electricity generation sector in decarbonisation efforts was
        a particularly striking finding [a].
      Analysis with the global TIMES model (TIAM-UCL) quantified the
        critical role of global learning on the UK energy system's potential
        transition to an alternately fuelled transport system [b].
      Analysis carried out using the UK MARKAL stochastic model quantified
        the range of potential costs of a radical energy system decarbonisation
        that requires an immediate and consistent implementation of carbon
        pricing rising to a 10th to 90th percentile range from &#163;100-400/ tCO2
        by 2050 [c].
      Analysis carried out using the UK Elastic Demand MARKAL model
        demonstrated the value of energy service demand reductions as an
        immediate decarbonisation response, hedging against both future high
        costs of decarbonisation as well as security of supply issues [d].
      Analysis reported to the Scottish Executive has illustrated the
        opportunities and costs of decarbonisation pathways for a devolved or
        independent Scotland [e].
    
    