CaseStudyId: 37182
Title: 
    Target Medicine &#8212; inspiring and supporting applications to medical
        schools from non-selective state school students
    

ImpactDetails

    The findings of interviews and observations conducted during the Dick
      Whittington Summer Schools (2005-2007) were used both to refine the team's
      questions and approach to identifying the needs of young people, and to
      deliver practical interventions leading to improvements in access to
        medical education. In turn, this has contributed to enhanced UK
        social mobility. This was achieved in the first instance by
      collating and sharing information from the summer school, including about
      how to make medical school interviews more accessible with UCL's medical
      school admissions office. However, the most significant research impacts
      arose from the use of the findings outlined above in the research team's
      creation in 2008 of Target Medicine (TM) [a], a London-wide
      mentoring, outreach, and work placement scheme. The programme is very
      oversubscribed, with five applicants applying for every Summer School
      place. Since 2008, TM has welcomed 260 young people to six Summer Schools
      (doubling the number of participants in the earlier Dick Whittington
      programmes), mentored a total of 860 students from 171 schools, and
      contributed to outreach work at the 50 UCL Outreach target schools.
      Between 2005 and 2013 the proportion of UCL medical students from
      selective, fee-paying schools (whose students account for just 7% of the
      UK's school population) fell from 60% to 34%.
    The TM Summer School is a week-long intensive course for 48 Year 11
      students from non-selective state schools in N, NW, SW, SE, E, EC, W and
      WC postcodes or the boroughs of Brent, Barnet, Enfield or Waltham Forest
      who are thinking of studying medicine, have predicted grades of B and
      above in Maths, English and Science GCSEs, and whose parents or carers
      have not been to university. The programme, which is run entirely by UCL
      staff (headed by Dr Jayne Kavanagh), helps students envisage life as
      medical students and doctors, and provides information about and guidance
      on the process of applying for a place at medical school. The week
      culminates with participants' preparation of a multimedia clinical case
      history for presentation to peers, parents and teachers. Target Medicine's
      most immediately significant outcome is its success in encouraging and
      supporting participants' successful applications to universities. The
      value of the scheme to student participants is evident from their feedback
      on it; according to a participant in the 2008 programme: "Target
        medicine helped me achieve more than I ever thought I could. I am really
        not what you would call a typical medical student. I was the first
        person in my family to ever even consider going to university, let alone
        become a doctor." A 2009 participant, who went on to accept a place
      to study Medicine at UCL in 2011, wrote: "I had the impression that
        someone with my background would find it difficult to enter such a
        competitive profession...the summer school has been immeasurably useful.
        It helped me realise why I wanted to become a Doctor and it convinced me
        I could." [b].
    The reach of the research impacts on local school students' awareness of
      &#8212; and interest in pursuing -medical education has been further enhanced by
      TM Outreach, which engages with 50 UCL target schools giving a total
      potential audience of 10,000 students; 24 of those schools are currently
      actively engaged, giving TM Outreach access to 5000 year 9 students each
      year. In 2013 alone, the Outreach team has conducted 29 visits to 28
      schools, giving talks and workshops to an average of 60 pupils per visit.
      Both school and medical school participants are supported by our development
        and provision of appropriate, up-to-date learning resources
      including lesson plans, power-point presentations, handouts on interview
      techniques, personal statement writing and critical thinking, tips on
      admissions tests, quizzes, self-evaluation forms, action plan forms, team
      evaluation forms, and structured worksheets to facilitate personal
      statement writing [c].
    In response to their research findings, the UCL team also incorporated
      into TM a comprehensive sixth form mentoring scheme, in which current
      medical students &#8212; many of whom are themselves from non-traditional
      backgrounds &#8212; are trained to mentor would-be applicants and guide them
      through the process of applying to medical school. Mentoring includes
      providing sustained assistance with finding such work experience,
      enhancing study skills, writing personal statements, developing interview
      techniques, and practicing admissions tests. Mentors offer further support
      through mock interview sessions with UCL Medical School interviewers; mock
      BMAT and UKCAT exams; and an early focus on the development of personal
      statements. Since 2008, the scheme has assisted almost 700 pupils, and now
      guides ~200 Year 12 and Year 13 pupils from London-based state schools
        through the medical school application process each year. 220 pupil
      school student participants in the 2010/11 mentoring scheme were surveyed
      between December 2012 and February 2013 to assess the impact of that
      programme on them. Teenagers are a notoriously difficult group to
      follow-up, but of the 38 respondents, 11 are now studying medicine.
    As well as supporting school pupil participants, the mentoring scheme
      allows the medical students who act as mentors to develop team-working,
      leadership, and teaching skills that enhance the quality of the service
      they supply in their future careers as healthcare providers. A 2011-2012
      mentor wrote: "The skills which I have been able to develop over the
        past few years have been invaluable in my progression as a medical
        student. As well as taking part in many extra-curricular activities, my
        passion for widening participation has been focused in my current role
        as the student lead for the UCL-based wing of Target Medicine."
      According to another: "The two personally most notable things I gained
        on the Summer School are intangible: an increase in confidence; and a
        keen sense of equality. Both have influenced me significantly: in
        equipping me with the enthusiasm and skills to mentor and teach on
        Target Medicine and at anatomy tutorials in medical school" [b].
      These sorts of success, moreover, have a series of broader and longer-term
        implications for the standards of UK healthcare provision and,
        therefore, for the health, welfare and quality of life of its citizens.
      In particular, the programme provides a forum for medical students from WP
      backgrounds to contribute to their own communities and helps to broaden
      the social diversity of medical student cohorts; as such, it contributes
      to the development of a medical profession that better represents the
      population it serves.
    A crucial new feature of TM, which specifically addresses deficiencies
      identified by the research, is the introduction in 2012 of access to high
      quality work experience in the NHS. Within one year, placement capacity
      has increased three fold to 128 available sites across North London (1 GP,
      70 Whittington Foundation trust and 57 UCL Hospital) and 160 students have
      completed work experience. The range both of the project's impacts and its
      beneficiaries has been further expanded by the team's development of
      strong and productive working relationships with these local primary and
      secondary healthcare services and with leading to enhanced
        understanding of WP issues among medical professionals more widely.
      Target Medicine's success is such that it features in the Medical Schools
      Council (MSC) and British Medical Association (BMA) joint publication A
        guide to widening access to medical schools (2010) [d]. Its
      inclusion in literature produced by the BMA, a professional association
      and trade union for doctors with a membership of 152,000, has
      significantly extended the reach of professional engagement with TM itself
      and the research underpinning it. That engagement has been enhanced still
      further through discussion of the project among the BMA's online community
      and student-facing websites including thestudentroom.co.uk, an online
      community with over 1 million members [e].
    TM has also featured in BMJ Careers (2010) &#8212; the UK's leading medical
      recruitment and careers website &#8212; as a case study exemplifying both
      innovative WP practice and the provision of opportunities for medical
      professionals to contribute to that practice [f], and the programme's
      benefits have extended to these professionals who volunteer to support it.
      One doctor who contributed to the 2013 programme reviewed the experience
      as follows: "Today [a group of other doctors and I] did something
        wonderful...We gave up our evening to talk to 16 year olds from
        underprivileged backgrounds...about why we had done medicine, why we did
        our speciality area, our most memorable patient or the patients who
        changed us or our careers. It was wonderful to see them so keen and
        interested and to be guided through those reflections and remember. It
        made me remember why I am so passionate about my job and how fantastic
        it is" [b].
    Finally, the research has also promoted and contributed to policy
        discussion and debate by highlighting the issue of poor access to
      the medical profession by those in lower social classes, through its
      influence on several important policy reports. These include the 2009 BMA
      report Equality and Diversity in Medical Schools [g], which in
      turn influenced the 2011 GMC The state of medical education and
        practice report [h]. The research team has, moreover, provided expert
        advice directly to policy-makers: The Cabinet Office produced its
      2012 report Fair Access to Professional Careers. In December 2011
      Kavanagh and Culpit shared their experiences of WP for low income and
      traditionally excluded communities in a presentation to Cabinet Office
      civil servants. They were invited to make this presentation to support
      Alan Milburn, in his role as Independent Reviewer on Social Mobility and
      Child Poverty, to improve access to medicine [i].
    
ImpactSummary

    For many academically able young people, low social class remains a
      persistent barrier to medical education and, subsequently, to careers in
      medicine: those from social class I are 100 times more likely than those
      from classes IV or V to win a place at medical school. Since 2004,
      research conducted at UCL has underpinned the development of a free
      Widening Participation (WP) programme for young people from non-selective
      state schools. That programme incorporates a wide range of activities,
      including a summer school; outreach programme; mentoring scheme and work
      experience placements to provide structured support and guidance for
      applications by non-selective state school students to medical school.
      Since 2007 more than 700 pupils have taken part in the programme. 18% of
      the first cohort obtained places at medical school and in 2013, 9% of that
      group qualified as doctors from UCL Medical School.
    
UnderpinningResearch

    UCL research has shown that there are considerable inequalities in
      medical school admission caused by social class (SC) [1]. Standardized
      admissions ratios showed a 30-fold variance between SC I and SC V, such
      that those from lower SC groups are seriously underrepresented. When
      social class and ethnicity were combined, the standardized admissions
      ratios showed a 600-fold variation, with black men from SC IV and V being
      particularly significantly under-represented. Indeed, this research showed
      that no black men from SC V entered medical school between 1996 and 2000.
      Medical schools' failure to recruit talented young people from these
      backgrounds has a negative impact not only on the students themselves, but
      also on the schools and medical schools, which subsequently lack
      appropriate and representative role models. In turn, this reduces the
      quality of the service able to be ultimately offered by medical schools
      and healthcare providers in their professional engagement with the UK's
      very diverse communities. As such, it has further impacts on patient care
      and the NHS, and perpetuates a stereotype of the medical profession as
      elitist, dominated by narrow social groups and unrepresentative of the
      diversity of the population.
    In 2004, researchers at UCL sought to address some of these problems
      through a study of young people's understanding of and attitude towards
      medical schools. Focus groups at six North London schools were used to
      assess attitudes among 68 academically able students aged 14-16 from
      selective and non-selective schools, and found that those from
      `non-traditional' (low-income and/or ethnic minority/refugee) backgrounds
      had little idea about either the process of applying to medical school or
      what was taught there. Despite being sufficiently academically able to
      apply for a medical degree most did not know how to go about doing so, and
      therefore fell at the first hurdles of the application process [1, 2]. The
      research highlighted gaps in existing Widening Participation (WP)
      ventures' understanding of the perceived barriers to access to medicine,
      notably in terms of background income and the cost of study, and
      recommended modifications to support the more effective targeting of the
      most relatively economically and socially deprived areas. These
      recommendations included increased community input to WP projects and
      their incorporation of credible role models as mentors [1, 2, 6]. In July
      2005, the team responded to these recommendations itself by establishing
      the `Dick Whittington' project, a one-week summer school to encourage
      forty 16 year-old students from schools in relatively deprived areas to
      consider a career in medicine or a health-related career. This project
      provided the foundations not only for many of the impacts described below,
      but also for a great deal of the research conducted by the UCL team since
      2005.
    That subsequent research is unified by its shared use of an action
      research methodology, wherein researchers have worked with participants
      both to identify barriers to accessing medical school and to deliver a
      programme of mentoring, outreach and information designed to improve WP
      activities in this area. Our initial focus groups identified the need for
      a pre-medicine Summer School in the first place; action research in the
      form of interviews, observations and questionnaires delivered during the
      establishment and running of our early Dick Whittington schools
      (2005-2006) subsequently identified a need for more continuous and
      sustained mentorship to support pupils in developing interview skills,
      gaining relevant work experience and writing high quality personal
      statements. Follow-up interviews with parents (2006) and informal
      discussions with teachers suggested the further need for more outreach
      provision and on-going peer support [3, 6]. One important finding of these
      evaluative processes was that, whilst participants found the information
      the Summer School supplied about medical careers and the process of
      applying to medical school helpful, it was not by itself sufficient
      catalyst for students from non-traditional backgrounds to make a
      successful application. Although potential applicants often had families
      who were supportive of their medical ambitions, they found it difficult to
      access appropriate work experience or help with writing personal
      statements and developing and practicing the interview skills after the
      Summer School had ended, making on-going mentoring imperative [4, 5].
    