CaseStudyId: 37236
Title: 
    Increased efficiency in turbomachinery design, manufacturing and
      performance using 3D inverse design software
    

ImpactDetails

    Since 2008, major turbomachinery manufacturers have adopted ADT's
      TURBOdesign&#8482; software suite in ever increasing numbers, as they sought to
      achieve improvements in their design processes and manufacturing methods,
      and thus unlock benefits such as increased efficiency of their
      turbo-machinery and reductions in CO2 emissions. Some of the
      key impacts arising from the UCL research are summarised below.
    Delivering more efficient design methods for the turbomachinery
          industry:
    A number of the leading turbomachinery manufacturers have changed their
      design systems to access the benefits that arise from the use of ADT's 3D
      inverse design approach. For example, in pumps manufacturing, four of the
      top ten global manufacturers, including Ebara Corporation, use
      TURBOdesign&#8482; in their design workflow [a]. Also the world's leading fan
      manufacturer, ebm-papst, uses TURBOdesign&#8482; in most of its divisions; one
      of the company's engineers noted: "Our experience shows that
        TURBOdesign&#8482; can reduce development / design time, improve efficiency
        and reduce noise of fan blades" [b]. Other leading companies in
      turbomachinery application areas such as aeroengines, automotive cooling,
      Central Processing Unit (CPU) cooling, cryogenic and air-conditioning
      applications and power generation have switched to using TURBOdesign&#8482; in
      their design systems [c].
    Many of these manufacturers are finding that using the code reduces the
      development and design time for their new designs and improves
      performance. For example, the Director of R&amp;D at Andritz Group said in
      a March 2013 article in Pumps and Systems magazine that the "the [ADT]
        software considerably supported the pump manufacturers to accelerate the
        hydraulic design process" [d]. In another article in Machine Design,
      Mr Toru Iwata of Daikin Industries said: "The software helped us reduce
        development time and slash material use, as well as develop new models
        of high-efficiency fans" [e].
    Enabling improvements in manufacturing methods in the
          turbomachinery industry: In the turbomachinery industry
      various methods are used for manufacturing the vanes and blades. For low
      volume vane and blade manufacture within aerospace applications, it is
      usual that CNC machines are utilised. For high-volume applications, such
      as turbochargers, it is customary to use casting or in some cases a flank
      milling process for blades with straight filaments, as these approaches
      result in lower manufacturing costs.
    In 2011, Cummins Turbo Technology, one of the leading manufacturers of
      heavy-duty diesel turbochargers globally, decided to take into high-volume
      production a turbocharger compressor with 3D blades. This was designed
      using the 3D inverse design method TURBOdesign&#8482; and machined by using a
      5-axis point milling process. The point milling process can add between
      15-20 per cent to manufacturing costs compared to flank milling or
      casting. The main impetus for the company to make such a substantial
      change in its manufacturing process was the fact that for 10 years they
      had not been able to make any improvement in the performance of a baseline
      turbocharger compressor, which had straight filaments, with direct design
      methods. By using the inverse design approach an impeller could be
      designed that was up to 3 points more efficient through most of the
      compressor map. However, this impeller had a 3D geometry and required a
      significant change in manufacturing process. The significant improvement
      in performance of the new compressor, in the eyes of Cummins Turbo and its
      major engine manufacturers, more than justified the additional costs
      associated with the changes to manufacturing method [f].
    The TURBODesign&#8482; software makes it easier to design 3D blade and vane
      geometries with high efficiency, and with the current rate of reduction in
      the cost of the point milling process it can create important
      possibilities for further improvement in turbomachinery component
      efficiencies.
    Increased turbomachinery efficiency and reduction of CO2
          emissions: One of the major impacts of industry's adoption of
      ADT's inverse design method is a significant improvement in the efficiency
      of turbomachinery. Earlier research had shown that breakthrough designs
      made possible by this approach can lead to significant improvements in
      pump stage efficiency of up to 6 points (see outputs [5] and [6], above).
      Similar levels of performance improvement are being achieved by industrial
      use of the inverse design method. For example, in 2013, Daikin Industries
      confirmed that they had improved the efficiency of an air-conditioning fan
      by 10% by using the inverse design method [e].
    Likewise, performance improvements have been achieved in other industries
      such as pumps, automotive and power generation through the adoption of
      this technology. For example in 2008, RR Marine, a major manufacturer of
      large-scale marine waterjets, was able to improve the propulsive
      efficiency of their marine waterjets by 3-5% by using ADT's software
      TURBOdesign&#8482; [g]. Furthermore, they obtained a significant reduction in
      manufacturing cost of their waterjets, which came on the market in 2013
      [g].
    These efficiency savings have consequent environmental benefits by
      reducing CO2 emissions. ebm papst has been using the inverse
      design method since 2006, and claimed in a 2008 advert in The Economist
      magazine that "If for ventilation, refrigeration and airconditioning,
        European industry switches to the latest generation of fans (designed by
        ebm-papst), 16 Million tons of CO2 emission
        will be cut and 4 coal fired power stations will be made redundant"
      [h].
    [text removed for publication]
    
ImpactSummary

    The development of a novel 3D inverse design method for turbomachinery
      aerodynamic design at UCL has led to important design breakthroughs for
      pump and compressor applications. The resulting IP and software has been
      commercialised by a UCL spinout company Advanced Design Technology Ltd
      (ADT), which is now considered a global leader in advanced turbomachinery
      design software. Since 2008, the 3D inverse design codes embedded within
      ADT's TURBOdesign&#8482; suite of software have been adopted by many of the
      leading turbomachinery equipment manufacturers in Europe, Japan and the
      US. These companies are using the TURBOdesign suite to achieve significant
      improvements in the time taken to design their turbomachinery components.
      It has also helped them unlock major efficiency gains and hence achieve a
      reduction in CO2 emissions. [text removed for publication]
    
UnderpinningResearch

    There are two different approaches to aerodynamic design of
      turbomachinery components such as turbines, compressors, fans, pumps and
      torque converters. The direct design approach is based on trial and error
      iteration of the blade or vane geometry by the designer, using feedback
      from a Computational Fluid Dynamics (CFD) code. This approach inherently
      results in a reduction of the design space as designers tend to operate
      within their comfort zone. Using this approach makes it more difficult to
      achieve designs beyond the designer's previous experience and is also
      time-consuming. The result is significant constraints on the ability of
      companies to achieve further improvements in the performance of their
      turbomachinery. By contrast, in the inverse design approach, the blade or
      vane geometry is designed for a given specified distribution of pressure
      or blade loading. The 3D pressure distribution controls the viscous
      behaviour of the flow; by controlling the 3D pressure field it is possible
      to directly use the detailed information provided by CFD solutions to
      arrive at a choice of optimum loading to control particular sources of
      loss in turbomachines. By removing the need for empiricism in the design
      process, the inverse design approach allows designers to directly use
      their knowledge of detailed fluid dynamics, as provided by CFD and
      detailed measurements, to arrive at a breakthrough solutions that solve
      particular adverse flow phenomena.
    The inverse design approach had previously been used extensively in two
      dimensions by the aeroengine industry but no robust design methods existed
      in three dimensions. To address this gap, the research group headed by
      Professor Mehrdad Zangeneh (Professor of Thermofluids, at UCL since 1989)
      in UCL's Department of Mechanical Engineering started working on the
      development of novel 3D inverse design methods in the early 1990s. One of
      the key aspects of previous inverse design methods was that they mainly
      relied on the specification of blade surface pressure on suction and
      pressure surfaces. This removed the designer's control of blade thickness,
      which is a very important parameter for high-speed applications.
      Furthermore, the compatibility conditions in three dimensions make it
      difficult to know the correct feasible spanwise static pressure
      distribution on the blade a priori, as spanwise variations in
      pressure are influenced by the streamwise flow distribution. This meant
      that development or extension of any inverse method in 3D had limited
      success. A key innovation arising from the UCL research was the use of
      blade loading within the design methodology. When coupled with pressure
      jump across the blade and blade thickness, it was possible to achieve a
      significantly more robust 3D inverse design method and this allowed some
      of the important outstanding problems in turbomachinery aerodynamics to be
      solved [1][2]. The design code was subsequently extended to marine ducted
      propulsors as a result of a $700k research grant from the US Office of
      Naval Research [3] and extended to include coupling with automatic
      optimisation for multi-point/multi-objective design [4]. UCL's application
      of 3D inverse design methods to various applications, especially in radial
      turbomachinery, resulted in important breakthroughs in design and led to
      the university filing a number of international patents [8].
    One of the first applications of the 3D inverse design method was in
      centrifugal compressors and pumps. The main aim was to reduce or eliminate
      secondary flows in the impeller, which result in significant flow
      non-uniformity (jet/wake flow) and hence are a major cause of loss in
      impellers. The nature of secondary flows and what causes them was quite
      well understood, but with conventional (or direct) design based on
      iterative changes to geometry it was rather difficult to arrive at a
      design that helped to reduce or minimise secondary flows. By using the 3D
      inverse design method, UCL researchers could establish a systematic
      approach for minimising secondary flows in centrifugal impellers. The
      control of secondary flows actually led to significant improvements to
      compressor/pump stage efficiency [5 and patents i and iii]. Other
      breakthroughs were related to control of 3D corner separation in pump
      diffusers [6 and patents iv, v and vi]. Further important breakthroughs
      were obtained in cavitation in pumps [7] and shockwave losses in transonic
      axial fans [2].
    The research was subsequently commercialised through the formation of a
      UCL spinout company, Advanced Design Technology (ADT), which was
      established as a joint venture with the major Japanese turbomachinery
      manufacturer, Ebara Corporation, in 1998.
    