CaseStudyId: 37724
Title: 
    The implementation of infrastructure investment into the local and
          sub-regional planning
        systems to promote sustainable economic growth in England
    

ImpactDetails

    Findings and tools developed through the UCL research outlined have since
      been used for various
      purposes: to effect changes in local and national planning policy; to
      improve practitioner
      understand the benefits of integrated planning approaches; to promote a
      more integrated and
      efficient investment approach among public bodies; and ultimately to
      deliver more sustainable
      outcomes and enhanced community engagement in local authorities across
      England.
    The adoption by local and national UK policy-makers of these findings was
      catalysed by their
      widespread communication through a series of events starting in 2007 led
      by the Bartlett School of
      Planning. These particularly included a seminar held in March 2007 and
      attended by the Chair of
      the House of Commons Select Committee, Chief Executive of the British
      Property Association and
      other leading figures from the public and private sector. A further
      seminar later that year was
      arranged specifically for the RTPI and its members. This was followed with
      the development and
      delivery of a national programme of over 40 regional seminars from 2007-10
      in four programmes
      of 10 sessions each, the development and publication of the Steps
        Guide in 2008 [1], and the
      development and delivery of delivery material and direct support packages
      to over 100 local
      authorities between 2007 and 2010. These activities have catalysed highly
      significant changes to
      English planning policy and practice, including:
    (i) Influencing UK planning policy: In June 2008 a review was
      conducted of the UK
      government's guidance provided to all local authorities, based on our
      research and its
      recommendations [4]. Key recommendations from the final report to
      the LGA &#8212; i.e. that local
      authorities needed some clear messages about the changing requirements for
      infrastructure
      delivery planning &#8212; were adopted in 2007 and resulted in the LGA
      commissioning direct support
      packages for local authorities to implement the approach identified in the
      report, and also informed
      the methodology used in the Mayor of London's first delivery plan for
      London in 2011 [5]. As a
      result, IDP methodologies developed from the UCL research are now being
      used by all 346 local
      authorities in England (an increase from zero in 2007) as a baseline for
      local planning, public and
      private sector investment [6]. Since 2011, these methods have also
      been used to calculate
      Community Infrastructure Levy (CIL) and development contributions [7].
      In London, this is
      supporting the case made and the bids developed by the Mayor for developer
      contributions to and
      further infrastructure investment for initiatives including Crossrail 2 [5].
      The research findings about
      the vital importance of integrated approaches to planning also now support
      neighbourhood plans
      and strategic infrastructure planning through Local Enterprise
      Partnerships (LEPs): local examples
      include the development of integrated local investment telecommunications
      in Croydon (2010) and
      integrated planning within a corporate environment in the London Borough
      of Redbridge (2012).
    From 2009, local authorities were also advised by the Planning
      Inspectorate National Service
      (PINS) to adopt both the general practice and Local and Regional
      Infrastructure Programmes for
      the examination of all local plans [2; para 25]. This preceded the
      incorporation of key aspects of
      that advice into the final iteration of the National Planning Policy
        Framework for England, issued by
      the UK government in 2012, and now required to be used by all local
      authorities in England [3].
    (ii) Professional training and development of a community of practice:
      The UCL research has
      supported a broader culture and practice change in UK planning, such as
      through policy and
      training modules for local authorities. The adoption by the LGA of the
      recommendations in the
      research report led it to fund a learning module for all local authorities
      in England, accompanied by
      a roll-out and learning programme. In 2008-10, researchers in the Bartlett
      School of Planning led
      more than 40 national seminars across England, with more than 50% of local
      authorities attending.
      The LGA has also funded 75+ training sessions for local politicians,
      private sector representatives,
      wider stakeholders, community groups, utilities, fire, and health
      services. One-day events at UCL
      in April 2011 and June 2013 each attracted over 120 participants from all
      sectors [8]. Feedback
      from participants in this training programme has been highly positive,
      with input by Morphet
      commended by various officials [9]. Through these events, a
      Community of Practice was
      established in 2008 which now has over 600 members in the UK and abroad to
      share information,
      queries and good practice, and also to operate as a support for cultural
      and professional change.
    The research also provided the basis for the development by UCL
      researchers of Morphet's 2008
      practitioner guide, A steps approach to infrastructure planning and
        delivery, published by the
      Planning Advisory Service (PAS) for local strategic partnerships and local
      authorities on
      infrastructure delivery planning to act as a guide in adopting the key
      research recommendations
      [1]. It is now widely used and frequently quoted by local
      authorities to support their methodological
      approach to infrastructure planning as part of their local plan, together
      with other widely
      disseminated and used practitioner guidance. The `steps' methodology has
      since been cited as
      good practice by PINS [2], and is referenced frequently by local
      authorities. The RICS has likewise
      commissioned a specific guide about IDPs for their membership. First
      issued in 2009, the guide
      has been updated by an accompanying article in the same subject by Morphet
      in 2012 [10]. The
      Knowledge Hub section of the LGA's Knowledge Hub website also
      hosts practitioner resources
      based on Morphet's work, and she has produced an invited blog on the
      integrated role of
      infrastructure delivery planning at the local, sub-regional and national
      levels for the RTPI [11].
    (iii) Adoption of a more integrated investment approach by public
        bodies: Prior to the UCL
      research, local authorities were not working across boundaries for
      infrastructure planning and
      provision, and hence infrastructure providers were working in isolation.
      This disconnected practice
      led in some cases led to the multiple provision of facilities in some
      areas, and elsewhere no
      provision at all. It is now working practice that infrastructure providers
      are core to the plan making
      and delivery process, and this is reinforced through PPS12 [4],
      the Planning Inspectorate's
      mandatory independent examination of local plans and which refers to the Steps
        Guide as
      exemplary practice in achieving this goal. Various local police, health,
      and fire services have all
      considered different locations and modes of service delivery as a result
      of UCL research and the
      resultant methodological change in practice, and many have started to act
      upon integrated
      investment strategies. The Surrey police force, for instance, closed many
      police stations from
      2009-11 and redeveloped the released land and buildings land for other
      uses from 2010 onwards.
      It is now relocating its police services to town halls and libraries, thus
      providing a `one-stop shop'
      for the public [12]. Infrastructure delivery planning has also
      promoted the co-location of facilities
      and services to improve public access and reduce operating costs. Examples
      here include: United
      Utilities in Lancashire and Cumbria engaging proactively in infrastructure
      planning processes to
      improve practices in water supply management and new development plans; in
      Sunderland,
      primary health services have been delivered jointly with older people's
      housing, supporting
      effective use of resources and complementary services for users; while in
      the Black Country and
      Greater Manchester, each statutory authority has produced single
      integrated infrastructure
      investment programme for their economic area, and promoting engagement
      across boundaries.
    (iv) Promotion of sustainable outcomes and community engagement:
      All the local authorities
      that are now preparing IDPs and neighbourhood plans engage in community
      decision-making as
      an integral part of the process, whereas previously this was only done as
      separate processes and
      failure to locate infrastructure in the most effective locations for
      community access and
      sustainability. In turn, this has led to infrastructure investment being
      based more on community
      priorities. For example, in urban areas such as Lewisham, Camden and
      Wandsworth the method
      has led to more efficient use of scarce accessible land resources and the
      reutilisation of brown-field
      sites for housing. Infrastructure provision has also become more closely
      integrated with
      existing communities rather than just focussing on new development as in
      previous practice.
    In Bristol, the IDPs were used to make a case for major investment in a
      public transit link in 2011
      which has resulted in planning applications for three key links and
      inclusion in the sub-regional
      programme [13]. This use of the IDP process to engage
      infrastructure providers including
      highways, education, health and their committed investment in
      Gloucestershire (2009 onwards)
      has led to specific joint working on infrastructure assets, future needs
      and energy requirements,
      which again is leading to more efficient and coordinated investment in
      facilities and the use of land.
    
ImpactSummary

    Research conducted by Gallent, Morphet et al has revealed a lack of
      understanding among
      planners, local authorities and public sector infrastructure providers
      about the key shift in spatial
      planning in England since 2004 towards integrated deliverability. This,
      plus further UCL research
      work suggesting appropriate means to redress this lack of understanding,
      led to the development
      of Infrastructure Delivery Planning (IDP) which has, in turn, had
      significant impacts on government
      policy and legislation for local plans. Since 2008, all 346 English local
      authorities have used IDP, a
      change that has supported the more effective and sustainable use of land,
      buildings and facilities,
      and given greater confidence to communities by demonstrating committed
      local investment.
    
UnderpinningResearch

    The development of Infrastructure Delivery Planning (IDP) has its roots
      in a research project on
      Effective Practice in Spatial Planning initially undertaken in 2007
      by a team at the Bartlett School of
      Planning (BSP). The research team comprised Professor Nick Gallent (now
      BSP Head), Professor
      Janice Morphet (Visiting Professor) and Professor Mark Tewdwr-Jones (at
      UCL from 2001-12).
    The project was run in partnership with the global consultancy company,
      Deloitte, following an
      open competition organised by the research funders: Royal Town Planning
      Institute (RTPI),
      Joseph Rowntree Foundation, Greater London Authority (GLA), and Department
      for Communities
      and Local Government (DCLG). Its objectives were: to identify potential
      barriers to good planning
      created by the new integrated deliverability planning system introduced by
      the UK government in
      2004; to suggest means of overcoming those barriers by improving best
      practice; to support culture
      change conducive with this improvement in the planning profession; and to
      encourage regional and
      local political leaders to increase certainty throughout the planning
      process.
    The research was undertaken in six stages, each driven by a named BSP
      team member:
    (i) Scoping the principles of spatial planning. During this stage
      of the research, Gallent led the
      delivery of a comprehensive literature review of spatial planning,
      exploring how the definitions
      (partnership arrangements, evidence for policies/programmes and `visioning
      exercises'), processes
      (facilitating and negotiating change, multi-level stakeholder involvement,
      innovation, creativity and
      shared ideas), and general outcomes (integration with other frameworks,
      co-operation across
      administrative and institutional boundaries) worked to focus on delivery
      particularly that of
      infrastructure [a, b].
    (ii) Learning lessons from other studies. Tewdwr-Jones led a
      literature review and series of
      interviews to identify valuable lessons from other studies of
      organizational and culture change in
      the planning profession [c].
    (iii) Identifying case study authorities to take part in the research.
      Led by Deloitte, this phase
      of the work developed and applied selection criteria addressing the
      experience, progress in plan-preparation,
      geography, size and type of local authorities that might be involved and
      which would
      make the research credible to local authorities and planning practitioners
      [b, c].
    (iv) Action learning with selected planning authorities. During
      2006, Deloitte studied the
      development of six case studies with the planning authorities selected in
      the previous stage. These
      used interviews, work-shadowing, group discussions, and assessments of
      policy and practice to
      characterise and evaluate the gap between current and effective practice [b].
    (v) Draft advice notes and areas for further research. Morphet led
      the preparation of the final
      report of ways in which plan making processes could and should be changed
      and this led to the
      commissioning of the Steps Guidance and to a &#163;500k training programme (see
      Section 4) [a].
    (vi) Final Report. A report summarising the research findings,
      together with recommendations for
      changes in advice and support for central government, the LGA, the RTPI
      and local authorities was
      produced by Gallent. Morphet and Tewdwr-Jones, and submitted in early-2007
      &#8212; with Morphet
      then also producing later research outputs explaining these findings [a,
        d, e].
    The key findings of the research were that essential elements of
      effective spatial planning must
      include a new and broader role for planning within local authorities,
      linked with infrastructure
      provider partners in all sectors. Before 2008, practitioners and local
      authorities had focused local
      planning on the preparation of policy and not on its subsequent delivery
      with partners. The report
      [a] recommended that there should be a common evidence base on
      infrastructure commitments
      and requirements for plan preparation and shared between partners, which
      is also available to the
      public in a transparent way. The research also showed that it was
      important that the regulatory role
      of planning in local government and development management also has a key
      role to play in
      infrastructure delivery It also indicated that partners should work
      towards greater horizontal and
      vertical cooperation &#8212; i.e. across boundaries and in aligning investment
      at different spatial scales.
    The UCL research findings and recommendations in the final report were
      used to build up a
      powerful case for two new specific tools. The first of these was a Local
      Infrastructure Programme,
      incorporating a Local Infrastructure Fund managed by a Local
        Infrastructure Group. It was
      envisaged that this programme would deliver more effective resource
      management and
      coordination, based on a new approach to Infrastructure Delivery Planning
      (IDP) that dealt
      differently with capital commitments and coordination between partners [a,
        d] as identified as good
      practice from the case studies and interviews for the research. The second
      tool recommended by
      the research was a Regional Infrastructure Programme, comprising a Regional
        Infrastructure Fund
      and Regional Infrastructure Group, so as to support effective
      resource management and planning
      coordination at regional levels.
    