CaseStudyId: 37827
Title: 
    Dryden Goodwin: Animating portraits in the public realm
    

ImpactDetails

    The research described above has achieved significant impacts on public
      engagement with, understanding of, and participation in contemporary art
      outside the museum or gallery context. In combination with extensive
      public engagement through publications, interviews, public talks and
      lectures, the public and strategic siting of the works has also increased
      awareness of important issues raised by Goodwin's research, and
      contributed to improvements in the quality of London life, including in
      terms of enhanced community cohesion and employee satisfaction among
      particular groups of workers.
    Goodwin's work has engaged broad public audiences with a range of
        important social, political and artistic issues, including ideas of
      anonymity, individuality and communication in urban contexts, and with the
      ways in which these may be explored through portraiture. In work produced
      as part of Linear, these issues were mirrored by the unique blend
      of anonymity and proximity within the London Underground (LU) environment,
      where 4 million individuals per day are packed in close proximity but with
      minimal interaction. Many of these encountered Linear: the work
      was distributed not only across the network but in 2,000 6'x4' sheet
      posters, placed in light boxes across the underground; as 3,000 A1
      posters; 30,000 fold-out leaflets; and at exhibition sites at Southwark,
      London Bridge and Stanmore Underground stations [1]. The reach of impacts
      on public engagement with ideas of anonymity and individuality was
      extended through presentations including at the National Portrait Gallery
      (19.10.2010); and screenings in London (National Transport Museum 2010,
      Canary Wharf Screen, May-July 2013), Oxford (Nuffield College), and Norway
      (Bergen National Academy of the Arts). The films and drawings were also
      shown as part of One Thing Leads to Another - Everything is Connected,
      a group exhibition at London's City Hall (14 May-10 June 2010) curated by
      Art on the Underground and accompanied by a free public discussion on
      1.6.2010 [2]. An accompanying book of the same title, featuring Linear,
      was published in 2012. The impacts were expanded further through teaching
      and discussion materials available on the project website, including
      teaching packs on drawing and the nature of portraiture.
    The project was, moreover, widely covered in print and online media,
      including ITN London Tonight, ArtSlant, Art Online, and the Guardian,
      in which Jonathan Jones described it as "gripping, thought-provoking and
      evocative of life in the big city" [3], and whose review of Linear
      provoked a lively public discussion in the comments section about the
      work, in particular about the drawing method. The popularity of Linear
      was such that its duration was extended for an additional 16 months to
      June 2012 [1].
    As well as engaging LU customers with these `big ideas' about the nature
      of life in London, Linear gave a face (through its portraits), a
      voice (through its films), and thereby an identity to its subjects among
      the LU staff. As such, it engaged millions of Underground travellers
        with the lives, personalities and stories of people often overlooked as
        individuals by the public. The London SE1 community website noted
      that staff involved in the project opened up to Goodwin "about life, love
      and the highs and lows of working on the Jubilee Line. From the mundane to
      the moving, staff revealed surprisingly intimate details of their lives"
      [4]. Posters invited passengers to "unlock the drawings" by watching the
      associated films online and to come to know the sitters as individuals.
      The call worked: by 1 March 2010, just a month after launch, the 60 films
      showing Goodwin drawing and in conversation with each sitter had received
      over 9,500 unique views [5], and comments on the project site included
      statements on these lines: "It is also a good reminder to us of the people
      behind the uniforms" [6]. Between May and July 2010, they were played on
      digital moving screens along the escalators and on larger video screens in
      stations across the Underground [1].
    Linear had a particularly positive impact on the morale of TfL
        staff at a time of severe cuts. At a public meeting, the then Head
      of Customer Service Strategy described it as "the best piece of work we've
      achieved in humanising our staff" [1]. Its individualising and humanising
      effects were immediately recognised and appreciated by staff members
      themselves: writing on 14 June 2010 on the AotU project page, one
      anonymous commentator affiliated with the LU said: "This project has
      brought LUL uniforms and suits to life and shown the human side of staff"
      [6]. Three years later, staff at an event in July 2013 to celebrate Linear
      still reported positive feelings: "I was very proud of my involvement from
      start to finish", one respondent said, whilst another reported "for some
      reason [it] made me feel valued as a member of staff" [7]. A number of
      staff-focused events were organised around Linear, including the
      project launch at the London Transport Museum on 5 February 2010;
      screenings and accompanying discussion sessions for staff; and a special
      event at Canary Wharf on 23 July 2013. The exhibition curator stated that
      Linear had the highest recognisability of an AotU art project
      amongst London Underground staff, and attributed this to its medium as one
      that people easily recognise and are receptive towards, to the work's
      audio-visual element and the artist-staff interaction [1]. The project's
      interest and value to LU staff is further suggested by its inclusion in
      internal communications, including On the Move magazine for TfL
      pensioners (13,000 circ.) and Newsline, the magazine for employees
      of the Jubilee Line [8].
    Linear's broader significance to LU identity is indicated
      by its inclusion in the London Transport Museum's 2013 exhibition, Poster
        Art 150: London Underground's Greatest Designs, as part of the
      celebrations of 150 years of the London Underground. The Linear
      poster was one of only 150 works selected from over 3,300, and the only
      moving image poster [9]. Linear's significance has also been
      recognised externally: at the Design Week Benchmark Awards in 2010,
      Goodwin's technical collaborator, Rose Design, won both Best in Show and
      the Public Sector Campaigns Category for Linear, which the judges
      described as an exceptional piece of public art and an important piece of
      employer communication [10]. The unique approach taken in Linear
      to public and staff engagement has further ensured its special
      significance to the development of its Art on the Underground curatorial
      strategy. Run before the introduction of now-ubiquitous Twitter promotions
      and QR codes, Linear marked the first use by AotU of a `Call to
      Action' in the form of the invitation to `unlock' the drawings online.
      This was also the first (and so far only) time that the Underground's LCD
      screens had been used to display art, the monochrome drawings providing a
      striking change from conventional colourful advertisements. This novel,
      multi-channel approach provided a model for Labyrinth, a 2013 AotU
      project with artist Mark Wallinger, covering 270 stations and with
      extensive accompanying learning resources, public engagement and
      interactivity [1].
    To these myriad positive effects Breathe (2012) added additional
      impacts on public engagement with and understanding of important
        environmental and health issues, in particular, air quality issues.
      The success of Linear influenced Breathe, both in form and
      its emphasis on the relationship between the intimate and anonymous. The
      reach of its public impacts were significantly enhanced by the fact that,
      instead of placing Breathe inside St Thomas' Hospital as
      originally intended, the 8-metre-high animation was projected onto the
      exterior with an estimated audience of over 225,000 people [11]. The
      significant media coverage of Breathe extended the reach of
      impacts on public engagement, not only with the work itself, but also with
      the otherwise largely invisible issue of inner city air pollution [12].
      The Visual Arts Development Manager at Guy's and St Thomas' Charity noted
      "the benefit to Guy's and St Thomas' NHS Foundation Trust was twofold: an
      opportunity for them to highlight the effects of modern air pollution on
      the London population, as well as raising the profile of Dr Frank Kelly's
      work and the Exhale project" [13].
    As with Linear, further engagement was facilitated and
      educational benefits delivered through associated teaching and learning
      resources. This was achieved through an educational programme developed by
      the Breathe producers, Invisible Dust, of drawing workshops to
      engage East London primary school children at the Evelina School with the
      science of breathing [14].
    The fact that the outdoor screen onto which Breathe was projected
      faced the Houses of Parliament across the Thames assured impacts on
      discussion and debate about this and related scientific, health and
      environmental issues among policymakers. The benefits that the work
      offered to scientists and advocacy groups as a new way of connecting
      audiences directly with these issues were acknowledged at an accompanying
      seminar, Breathe: Turner Updated, at the Houses of Parliament
      (16/10/2012), which explored the effects of air pollution and the
      important role of highly public and visible art as a strategy to
        communicate and highlight these issues [15]. A questionnaire
      completed by over 60% of the attendees returned resoundingly positive
      feedback, with a recognition of the importance of and capacity for art and
      science to act together to engage both the public and policymakers with
      environmental and health issues [15]. Meanwhile, Goodwin's scientific
      collaborator, Frank Kelly, described it as "a `refreshing' experience for
      him to work with Goodwin, both because he learned to explain and view his
      own work differently, and also because he witnessed how his scientific
      findings were received and re-translated" [16]. The seminar, which was
      organised by the Environmental Audit Committee and Parliamentary Office of
      Science and Technology, and attended by 80 students, scientists, media
      professionals, researchers, and parliamentary staff, also helped forge new
      links between Parliament and St Thomas' Hospital [14].
    
ImpactSummary

    Dryden Goodwin's research into drawing and portraiture as a means of
      communication has achieved significant public impacts through
      strategically sited public interventions. Linear (2010) engaged
      passengers on the London Underground system with contemporary art while
      raising awareness and visibility of the staff working in the stations,
      leading to improved staff morale, and had tangible impacts on the Art on
      the Underground curatorial strategy. It also led to the commissioning of Breathe
      2012, which made the vital issue of urban air pollution visible, and was
      used to educate policymakers, students and the wider public about this
      important issue.
    
UnderpinningResearch

    Since 2007 Dryden Goodwin (Lecturer at the UCL Slade School since
      September 2007; appointed Reader in Fine Art in October 2012) has explored
      and exploited the experience of portraiture within different contexts to
      investigate the experience of the contemporary city, reflecting on notions
      of public and private, the relationship between anonymity and intimacy,
      voyeurism, desire and emotional distance. His research questions the
      ability of any portrait to adequately describe (or portray) a subject; he
      particularly considers the influence of the artist's relationship to
      subjects who may be family, celebrities, strangers or communities of
      people with a shared work or environment. More broadly, his work explores
      the role of drawing and its animation, which has fed into an expansive
      notion of portraiture. A key aspect of this is using the relationship
      between pencil and video to explore and encourage an active relationship
      between the still and moving image in the imagination of the viewer.
    His examination of some of these issues began with The Calvert Centre
        Project, 2007 [a], a permanent artwork installed in a new building
      in Hull and consisting of 20 small drawings of the patients, local
      residents, medical and council staff who were to use the centre. This idea
      of relating the subject of the portraits directly to their location was
      further developed in 12 Portraits, 2008 [b], commissioned for a
      retail centre in Bristol. Here, Goodwin emphasised a "kind of democracy of
      shared endeavour" and sought to "counterbalance the eventual inevitable
      invisibility of these people" by etching portraits of the construction
      workforce into 12 metal plates in the central stairwell. The relationship
      between anonymity and intimacy within the city was explored in Cast,
      2008 [c], a major solo exhibition and monograph at The Photographer's
      Gallery, London, which focused on strangers travelling through London's
      West End, engrossed in private moments of quiet reflection.
    These themes were further developed in the two projects underpinning the
      impacts. Linear (2010) [d] was commissioned for Transport for
      London (TfL)'s Art on the Underground (AotU) programme. Goodwin sought to
      explore the context of the London Underground (LU) in recording encounters
      with Underground staff and presenting them into the same environment.
      Goodwin made 60 pencil portraits of Jubilee Line staff with films
      recording both the drawing process and Goodwin's conversations with each
      sitter. The work explored the relationship between the anonymity of the
      context in which they were displayed and the intimacy of the interaction
      between the artist and sitter. Linear was presented across the LU
      network on poster sites, light boxes, leaflets and digital video displays,
      with exhibition sites at three Underground stations. The monochrome
      aesthetic of the drawings was intentionally distinct from the usual
      colourful and photographic advertising displayed, creating a distinctive
      imaginative space for the general public to contemplate the ideas raised
      by the project. The graphic design of the project was supported by Rose
      Design, with an online exhibition of all 60 films by online technology
      company Nice Spots. Linear actively explored relationships between these
      media.
    Breathe (2012) [e] was an 8-metre animated portrait of a young
      child (Goodwin's son) progressing through fluctuating breathing patterns,
      projected at night time onto St Thomas' Hospital, facing the Houses of
      Parliament across the Thames. The portrait, which was made up of more than
      1,300 tiny pencil drawings, critiqued the quality of London's air and
      conveyed the dangers posed by air pollution to children in urban areas.
      Goodwin worked on the project with Professor Frank Kelly, an expert on
      lung health at King's College London and an advisor to the Government on
      air pollutants.
    Breathe was curated by Alice Sharp as part of a wider project, Invisible
        Dust, which seeks to encourage awareness of and promote meaningful
      responses to environmental issues.
    