CaseStudyId: 37840
Title: 
    Materialising the digital: The commercial, social and cultural
        benefits of new artistic forms
    

ImpactDetails

    SCEMFA research has supported the creation of new forms of artistic
        expression and the production and preservation of new cultural resources
      from a medium widely considered non-physical, impermanent and ephemeral.
      This is demonstrated by the production of original art and by a series of
      subsequent, high-profile acquisitions, permanent installations and public
      art commissions from important galleries, museums and other organisations.
      In many cases, these represent the first commissioning or acquisition of
      digital works by those organisations. The research has also supported
        national and international public engagement with these original
      works of art (and, by extension, with the museums and galleries in which
      they are shown), including through its use as the basis for a wide-ranging
        programme of public events and for the development of new
        information and learning resources to accompany the work itself.
    These impacts have arisen particularly from SCEMFA's active collaboration
      with curators and the wider professional art community: Collins, for
      example, was an invited member of and contributor to the Tate's
      AHRC-funded `Beyond Text' research network (2008-10), and Thomson's
      research on `sculpting the web' [d] has led to groundbreaking and on-going
      involvement with museums and curators on conceptualising digital art for
      the gallery space. The SCEMFA research was widely shared by Collins
      through a series of invited talks and keynote lectures for diverse
      international audiences of students, artists, curators and members of the
      public. Venues have included Sergio Motta Art and Technology Forum, Sao
      Paolo, Brazil 2009; Bangkok University, Thailand 2010; Shenkar College,
      Tel Aviv 2011, as well as a UCL public lunch hour lecture on Framing
        the Digital: Materialising New Media (31/1/13), which was webcast
      live and made available on YouTube [1].
    One of the works featured in that lecture was Seascape, which was
      shown at the De La Warr Pavilion, Sussex (April-June 2009). The gallery
      reported 18,756 visitors to the show, which was accompanied by free talks,
      videos, schools projects and tours as part of a comprehensive programme of
      public events. Collins' show enabled the gallery to extend the reach of
      its interpretation programme beyond its premises for the first time, with
      a talk to a digital media audience at Lighthouse, Brighton. Reviewing the
      show for The Times in 2009, the renowned film director Ken Russell
      recognised and celebrated Seascape's futurity and exploration of
      "how electronic space enables us to experience physical space in an
      amplified way" [2]. Five prints from Seascape were acquired by the
      Government Art Collection and displayed from Oct 2010 to Jan 2012 in 10
      Downing Street's prominent First Floor Corridor area. In April 2013, some
      of the prints were put on display at the new Department of Culture, Media
      and Sport building in Whitehall [3].
    Thomson's collaborative work (as T&amp;C), BEACON, was widely
      exhibited in the UK and overseas: it appeared in Tallinn, New York,
      Edinburgh and London in 2008-11 alone. Decorative Newsfeeds also
      engaged wide public audiences through the installation of the latter as a
      semi-permanent outdoor work in Forest Hill, London from 2006-11. Its
      planned lifespan of five years was then extended to January 2013, thanks
      to its favourable reception by the sponsor Sainsbury's, Lewisham Council
      and local residents. The commissioner described Decorative Newsfeeds
      as "one of the most successful works for the public realm I have been
      personally involved in, connecting daily with thousands of passers-by and
      customers to the store." Demonstrating the impacts of SCEMFA research on
      wider artistic and curatorial practice, he added: "it has provided an
      important model for the installation of electronic/virtual works in the
      public realm and is an example that I use often in my work as a
      curator/facilitator for contemporary art in the public realm and would
      highly recommend the work to others" [4].
    The success of Decorative Newsfeeds led to a &#163;60,000 commission
      in January 2008 (Commissions East) for another five-year, outdoor public
      version of the work for the Junction, Cambridge. In 2010, the work was
      cited in Rethinking Curating as an example of how artists can
      bridge the gap between the distributed networks explored by digital
      artwork and gallery or public spaces [5, p. 67]. It also facilitated
      further research with the Harris Museum, Preston (The Distance
        Travelled, 2011); and the National Media Museum (A live portrait
        of Tim Berners-Lee, 2012). The Distance Travelled
      represented the first acquisition of digital art for the Harris Museum
      collection, who described its acquisition as a "completely new departure"
      [6], while the Life Online Content Curator at the National Media Museum
      noted that A live portrait of Tim Berners-Lee "raised some very
      interesting questions relating to the nature of digital art acquisition (a
      fairly new challenge to the Media Museum)...The nature of [the] piece
      means that it will continue to comment on the themes of the exhibition for
      as long as the web exists" [7].
    Decorative Newsfeeds also led in May 2010 to a commission from the
      Museum of London (MoL) to mark the launch of its new permanent Galleries
      of Modern London. The result of that commission was London Wall
      (2010), whose planned run to 5 September 2010 was extended by popular
      demand to the end of October 2010. London Wall has since been
      acquired as part of MoL's permanent collection as a socio-historical
      record of online social networking &#8212; the museum's first acquisition of its
      kind. London Wall was in situ for a total of five months
      (MoL total visitor numbers for the year ending 31 March 2011 were 671,951
      [8]). Following the commission's success, senior curator Francis Marshall
      at MoL consulted T&amp;C on policy development for MoL to commission,
      exhibit and collect more digital artworks.
    The reconceptualisation through SCEMFA research of digital art as
      something that may inhabit physical spaces has opened the door for the
      production of other kinds of new, permanent public artefacts. Faithfull's
      Liverpool to Liverpool work constituted a central contribution to a
      widely acclaimed project recognised as having regenerated a previously
      rundown part of Liverpool's historical cityscape: the station's annual
      footfall is now estimated by Network Rail to exceed 24 million per annum
      [9]. The launch of the work was accompanied by extensive public engagement
      activity, including public performance lectures at St George's Hall,
      Liverpool and the Adelphi Hotel, and the urban regeneration sponsor,
      Liverpool Vision, attests to the public interaction with the art within
      the station's space, where many people are seen "`following' the art
      trail" [10]. In 2011, the project won a blue plaque from the National
      Railway Heritage Awards for "creating a magnificent setting" for the
      station. The Public Art Officer for Liverpool City Council has recognised
      the integration of Faithfull's art into the Lime Street Gateway project as
      a best practice model for future projects, particularly praising
      Faithfull's engagement from an early stage with the commission, with the
      specificity of Liverpool's Lime Station, and the potential viewers of his
      work [11].
    Research into Materialising the Digital has also delivered
      commercial benefits, particularly through its use to provide external
        organisations with new techniques and approaches to design. A new
      range of digital print fabric was, for example, commissioned by and
      released as part of Liberty's Autumn/Winter 2012 premium art fabrics
      collection, after the store's head of design saw Head's Raw Material
      exhibition. Two works from that show, Virtual Light and Dust
        Flowers, were developed into Liberty print designs and produced on
      over 10,000m of a range of fabrics; by the end of Winter 2012 most of the
      range had sold out, and at least one special request had been received for
      further metreage. Liberty also cited Head's work as the "original
      inspiration" for a collection of digital prints by various designers [12].
      His Liberty prints have since been used in the manufacture of other
      products, from pushpins to clothing, with Virtual Light being used
      by Nike for a Nike x Liberty collaboration titled `pixel pack' [13].
      Launched in June 2013 as an exclusive limited edition, the range caused an
      intense fashion buzz on both sides of the Atlantic [14], selling out at
      Liberty within weeks of its launch.
    
ImpactSummary

    Research conducted by the UCL SCEMFA research group into materialising
      the digital has had many and varied impacts, including the creation of new
      forms of artistic expression, and the production of new cultural
      resources. The research has also had demonstrable impacts on cultural
      heritage, both through the acquisition of its outputs into important
      national collections and through contributions to policy relating to the
      preservation of digital artefacts. Wider societal and cultural
      contributions have been delivered through work in the public realm, and
      commercial benefits have accrued through collaboration with Liberty.
    
UnderpinningResearch

    Since its foundation in 1995, the UCL Slade Centre for Electronic Media
      in Fine Art (SCEMFA) has interrogated the material of the digital, a field
      in which it was one of the first research centres internationally to
      specialise. Its members include Susan Collins (full-time academic staff
      since 1995, Professor since 2011), Jon Thompson (part-time lecturer since
      1995, Reader since 2011), Simon Faithfull (part-time lecturer since 2003)
      and Tim Head (part-time lecturer from 1976 until retirement in 2011).
      United by their shared focus on the exploration of the `Material of the
      Digital', SCEMFA researchers interrogate this notion in diverse ways.
    A key starting point for this investigation was Collins' pioneering 1997
      work, In Conversation (http://www.inconversation.com),
      which used one of the earliest examples of online video streaming to link
      the internet to the public physical space of the street, thereby bringing
      the internet into the physical realm and online and offline participants
      into contact with one another. Prompted by the unexpected artefacts and
      imperfections that appeared in the live images, Collins extended this
      investigation with an on-going remote landscape series (including Fenlandia
      2004, Glenlandia 2005, Harewood 2008) employing live
      transmission through the internet for its fabrication. These ideas were
      explored further in Seascape 2009. Here, Collins combined digital
      technologies with the classical traditions of English landscape painting
      to create a series of gradually unfolding digital seascapes using imagery
      captured in real time by network cameras installed at five vantage points
      between Margate and Portsmouth. Each image was constructed one pixel at a
      time, from top to bottom and left to right, in horizontal bands developing
      continuously over six and a half hours &#8212; the approximate time it takes for
      the tide to come in or out &#8212; to reveal the endless fluctuations in light,
      movement, time and tide, as well as the shifting weather conditions of the
      English coastline [a].
    Head likewise explored the basic ingredients of the digital medium; since
      1998 he has used a series of real-time computer programs to generate
      visual outputs on screens and projections, as well as to produce inkjet
      prints. Here, he sets out to redefine the usual role of a commercial
      inkjet printer, diverting it from a reproduction machine into a direct
      primary printing medium in its own right. This investigation formed the
      basis of Raw Material 2009 [b], which consisted of screen and
      projection-based works, as well as a series of prints: Dust Flowers.
    In 2008, Faithfull was commissioned by a consortium including Liverpool
      City Council, Liverpool Biennial and other partners to explore this act of
      materialisation as the public art component of the regeneration of Lime
      Street station, the Grade II-listed `gateway' to Liverpool city centre. In
      Liverpool to Liverpool (2008), Faithfull conceived a work serving
      as a gateway between the digital, the performative and the physical [c].
      He linked the city's heritage as a trade hub with its future in a digital
      age through 181 digital drawings made on a Palm Pilot during a journey
      from Liverpool, UK to Liverpool, Nova Scotia. These were sent as postcards
      to 181 Liverpudlians chosen randomly from the (Liverpool UK) telephone
      directory. The pixelated drawings, each with its precise GPS coordinates
      included, were eventually given physical form by being etched into the
      paving and glass of the redeveloped Liverpool Lime Street station in 2010.
    Thomson's collaborative research with Alison Craighead (University of
      Westminster and Goldsmiths College) as Thomson &amp; Craighead (T&amp;C)
      spans online and public art commissions, as well as gallery-based work.
      Like Collins and Head, Thomson uses his work to explore the use of
      real-time processes and live data transmission as material or artistic
      media and to demonstrate the potential for intangible content circulating
      on digital networks to be brought into the physical world. BEACON
      2005 [d] continuously relays live web searches as they are made around the
      world, representing them at regular intervals in a way that becomes a form
      of contemporary concrete poetry [d]. The work exists online; as a
      projection in the gallery; and more recently as a mechanical railway
      half-flap sign developed via Thomson's AHRC-funded research, whose
      sculptural, physical presence brings together a retro technology (the
      mechanical railway flap sign) with a very current one (the internet search
      tool). Like In Conversation, BEACON makes a live,
      real-time connection between physical public space and the online public
      space of the internet.
    Decorative Newsfeeds 2004 [e], developed in parallel with [d],
      extended this research to create a real-time installation presenting
      up-to-the-minute headline news from around the world as a series of
      generative animations, demonstrating one of the ways in which transitory
      digital content can manifest in site-specific ways and become an artefact
      in itself. Originally developed for gallery exhibition, the work explores
      how an artist might `draw' with live data (in this case rolling news
      headlines), rather than traditional materials. It was later developed as a
      bespoke colour LED screen comprising a series of special curving tracks
      visible in direct sunlight. This work was installed first at Forest Hill,
      London (2006) and later in a semi-permanent external installation at The
      Junction, Cambridge (installed 2008). Most recently London Wall
      2010 [f], one of three commissions used to re-launch the Museum of London
      (MoL) following its refurbishment, explored the transformative effects of
      digital technology on our perception of the world and the utility of
      digital communications technologies as tools for showing and recording
      social history. The work comprised over 500 fly-posters representing
      social media traffic within a three-mile radius of MoL, presented as a
      large-scale performative concrete poem.
    