CaseStudyId: 38117
Title: 
    Targeted intraoperative radiotherapy at the time of lumpectomy for
      patients
      with early breast cancer as an alternative to conventional 3-6 weeks of
      postoperative radiotherapy
    

ImpactDetails

    Over 200 breast cancer teams world-wide now use TARGIT including:
      Cleveland Clinic; University
      of California San Francisco; University of Southern California; Cornell;
      Georgetown University;
      Advocathealth hospitals in Chicago; Moffit cancer centre, Florida; about
      two-thirds of breast
      centres in Germany; several centres in the rest of Europe. The busiest
      centre has treated over 500
      cases and manufacturers Carl Zeiss report that in all, over 8,000 patients
      have been treated with
      TARGIT [a].
    Thus, this idea and resulting research from UCL has revolutionised the
      treatment paradigm from
      radical radiotherapy to localised radiotherapy.
    Impact on patients and their families: improvement in length and
        quality of life, at a reduced cost
    Many women are obliged to choose a mastectomy when they are not able to
      take the prolonged
      postoperative course of radiotherapy because of geography, time or money
      constraints. Many
      receive suboptimal treatment. With TARGIT, such women can have a
      lumpectomy and preserve
      their breast. Even amongst those who have a lumpectomy, TARGIT causes less
      pain, higher level
      of patient satisfaction, and higher quality of life scores than those
      receiving conventional
      radiotherapy [b]. There is a significant improvement in a woman's
      cancer journey when the whole
      of local treatment is completed at the time of the cancer operation,
      rather than a daily 3-6-week
      commute to the cancer hospital. TARGIT patients also have half the risk of
      death from heart
      disease or other cancers by avoiding toxicity. From the numbers in the
      trial (13 fewer deaths
      amongst 1,140 patients who were randomised to receive TARGIT at the time
      of lumpectomy), one
      can extrapolate that out of 8,000 patients, 91 such deaths have already
      been prevented. In
      communities where the patients have to pay for their treatment, TARGIT is
      a fraction of the cost of
      conventional radiotherapy &#8212; leading to more equitable availability of
      treatment.
    Impact on the routine treatment guidelines/recommendations for
        patients in the community
    The TARGIT-A trial was the first proof of principle of `partial breast
      irradiation' and other methods
      of giving partial breast irradiation have proliferated. TARGIT either as a
      tumour bed boost or as
      definitive treatment as well as other methods of partial breast
      irradiation are now included in
      guidelines issued by the European Society of Breast Cancer Specialists [c],
      the European Society
      of Medical Oncology (which are also endorsed by the Japanese Society of
      Medical Oncology) [d]
      and in German national guidelines [e].
    In March 2011, at the biennial international "St Gallen consensus"
      conference, 52 world experts
      voted in favour of using intraoperative radiation in selected patients. At
      this time the only level 1
      randomised evidence was from the TARGIT-A trial [f]. In December
      2012, the newsletter at the
      largest breast cancer conference at St Gallen featured our late breaking
      paper [g]. Our research
      has also attracted significant media attention both in scientific
      periodicals as well as lay press [h].
    NICE is currently consulting on the use of TARGIT in routine practice [i].
      The Marmot committee
      on screening has suggested that in patients whose cancers are found only
      on mammographic
      screening, if TARGIT is used rather than EBRT, this would minimise side
      effects due to the over-diagnosis
      and overtreatment that is known to occur with mammographic screening [j].
      We have
      also demonstrated that TARGIT is a method of avoiding cardiac toxicity of
      EBRT [k].
    Impact on the healthcare delivery and budget
    Breast cancer constitutes 1/3 of the workload of a typical radiotherapy
      department and in many
      areas there can be long waiting lists. When a significant proportion of
      this time is freed up by using
      TARGIT in the operation theatre, it can be used to treat other cancers in
      a timely manner.
    Assuming that each of the 8,000 patients who had TARGIT during their
      lumpectomy would have
      required 30 conventional radiotherapy sessions rather than the single
      session at the time of
      surgery, and that TARGIT takes the time equivalent of 4 routine
      radiotherapy sessions, this is a
      saving of 208,000 radiotherapy sessions to date. Assuming each session
      costs a conservative
      &#163;200, the saving of 208,000 sessions has already saved &#163;41.6m world-wide.
      It is estimated that
      adoption of TARGIT in the UK will save about &#163;60m per year from manpower
      costs alone. A more
      formal model has predicted this amount to be $280m in the US [l].
    
ImpactSummary

    Research from UCL Division of Surgery has transformed the breast cancer
      treatment paradigm so
      women can complete their local treatment intraoperatively (~30 min), with
      reduced toxicity. Our
      work has challenged the dogma of giving several weeks of whole breast
      radiotherapy (EBRT) after
      lumpectomy for breast cancer with our idea of irradiating only the tumour
      bed in selected cases; we
      have developed and evaluated new technology called TARGeted Intraoperative
      radioTherapy
      (TARGIT) within the novel approach of risk-adapted radiotherapy. To date,
      TARGIT has saved
      180,000 hospital visits and could save &#163;60M(UK)/ $280M(USA)/year.
    
UnderpinningResearch

    Radiotherapy for breast cancer remains an integral part of treatment and
      reduces the risk of local
      recurrence of cancer after breast-conserving surgery. However, many
      patients have limited access
      to radiotherapy and are unable to attend daily for 3-6 weeks for
      post-operative radiotherapy. Such
      patients will choose mastectomy, sacrificing the breast for the
      convenience of avoiding a lengthy
      and expensive course of radiotherapy. This problem is prevalent in many
      parts of the developing
      world, but also affects women in Europe and the USA who live far from a
      radiotherapy centre.
    The initial impetus for "single-shot" intra-operative radiotherapy for
      breast cancer arose from
      observations by Professor Jayant S Vaidya at Tata Memorial Hospital,
      Mumbai during the early
      1990s that although two-thirds of mastectomy specimens for small breast
      cancers harbour occult
      cancers distributed throughout the breast, well over 90% of breast
      recurrences in the conserved
      breast appear in the original tumour bed. Professor Vaidya moved to UCL in
      1998 and, in
      collaboration with Professors Michael Baum and Jeff Tobias, developed a
      hypothesis for a novel
      treatment: we proposed that radiotherapy be limited to the tumour bed and
      administered as a "one-off"
	  radiation treatment at the time of surgery, avoiding the expensive
      15-to 30-day course of
      EBRT and sparing many an unnecessary mastectomy. This became the TARGeted
      Intraoperative
      radioTherapy (TARGIT) technique [1, 2].
    Through translational research in 2004-8 on the immediate effects of
      radiation on a fresh wound, in
      collaboration with Dr Samuele Massarut and Dr Gustavo Baldassare, we found
      for the first time
      that the fluid that collects in the wound after a lumpectomy is highly
      favourable to cancer cells,
      stimulating them to multiply and invade. This could partly explain the
      propensity of recurrence to
      occur in the tumour bed. We also found that giving TARGIT immediately
      after a lumpectomy
      nullifies such effects and creates a beneficial micro-environment that is
      not conducive to tumour
      growth and invasion [3].
    We conducted an international randomised clinical trial (TARGIT-A trial)
      (2000-2012) comparing
      single-dose TARGIT with standard 3-6 weeks' radiotherapy in 3,451
      patients. We found that
      cancer control rates using TARGIT were similar to EBRT [4].
      Updated results were presented at
      the San Antonio Breast Cancer Conference (6 Dec 2012, General Session 4, http://goo.gl/4E10I)
      confirming that, in selected cases, TARGIT given at the time of lumpectomy
      within a risk-adaptive
      approach gives similar cancer control as EBRT. In addition we showed that
      it also results in
      significantly fewer non-breast cancer deaths mainly from cardiovascular
      causes and other cancers.
      Long-term results of our phase 2 studies suggest that if TARGIT is given in
        addition to EBRT as a
      tumour bed boost, the local recurrence of cancer appears to be halved [5].
      We have now launched
      the TARGIT-B randomised trial to test this in young / high-risk patients.
    Our discovery that abolition of the tumour stimulating effect of surgical
      wound fluid by
      intraoperative radiotherapy has opened up a new avenue of intervention for
      disease. This effect
      due to significant changes in wound proteins might spill over systemically
      and may explain some of
      the reduced non-breast cancer mortality that we have seen in our
      randomised trial. The HTA
      funded TARGIT-B trial will test this formally and begin a novel strategy
      for drug discovery,
      potentially benefiting future patients.
    