CaseStudyId: 38183
Title: 
    Increasing public awareness of and informing policy relating to the
      effects of recreational drug use
    

ImpactDetails

    The CPU has made a range of contributions to discussion, debate and
      decision-making at national policy level. In 2006, Curran presented expert
      evidence to the Home Office's Advisory Council on the Misuse of Drugs
      (ACMD) on ketamine which contributed to the Government's decision in 2006
      to classify ketamine as Class C; use did not subsequently decline and in
      2012, Home Secretary Teresa May requested a new ACMD review with Curran
      appointed to the working group (decision due in 2014) [a].
      Meanwhile, the Independent Scientific Committee on Drugs (ISCD)
      commissioned us to write the `Ketamine Review' (ref 4 above) and BBC News
      timed a feature on ketamine to go out on the day this was published [b].
      Curran gave evidence about new psychoactive substances to the All-Party
      Parliamentary Group on Drug Policy Reform at the House of Lords in May
      2012 [c]. The report of this committee will form a basis for
      Government policy on emerging new drugs. Curran has also advised the ACMD
      on ecstasy and methamphetamine.
    Internationally, Curran was a key witness on the subject of MDMA
      sentencing guidelines for the trial U.S. v. McCarthy, 2011 (WL
      1991146) which took place in New York in December 2010. Her five-hour
      testimony played the major role in the Judge's decision (in July 2011) to
      reduce the custodial sentencing for MDMA possession by 60%. The trial
      details are available on the web training resource for federal defenders
      in the US and have been cited by the Federal Public and Community
      Defenders and the American Civil Liberties Union in comments on proposed
      amendments to the US sentencing guidelines [d]. In 2013 the
      research on THC influenced policy-makers in the Netherlands to recommend
      separate legal penalties for high-potency THC cannabis (&gt;15%) compared
      with low-potency THC cannabis [e].
    Our research has impacted on national and international media discourse
      about, public awareness of, and engagement with the effects of
      recreational drug use. Our activities have fallen into three areas:
      providing accurate, scientifically based information to improve public
      understanding of the topic; engaging directly with drug users to
      disseminate the findings of our research; and engaging with the media in
      novel ways.
    Members of the unit have given talks at national and international
      conferences with mixed audiences of academics, policy-makers, healthcare
      professionals and the public. For example, in January 2011, Curran gave a
      public talk entitled `What is a drug?' at the Wellcome Trust's `High
      Society' Exhibition, and Morgan gave an interactive lunch time seminar on
      drug use [f]. As a member of the Independent Scientific Committee
      on Drugs, Curran contributes to their website giving information on
      psychoactive drugs to the public [g].
    The CPU also contributed to public engagement with drug issues by
      organising public events, notably `K-Day' which took place in November
      2009. To address a lack of engagement between researchers, healthcare
      professionals, users and policy makers, `K-day' brought these groups
      together for seven hours of activities, stalls and workshops run in a
      `village fete' format, bringing together 152 ketamine users, predominantly
      aged 15-25, and 50 professionals. A key theme emerging from focus group
      discussions was that the day made ketamine users feel valued and many
      commented that nobody had ever asked them their opinion about ketamine
      before or about their experiences. A quiz testing both users' and
      professionals' knowledge was distributed before and after the event, there
      was an average 50% improvement rate of people's knowledge of the subject
      after the day. Each attendee was given a bag at the beginning containing
      various informational leaflets we prepared for the day and further contact
      details as well as details of current research projects. As a result of
      K-day, a number of collaborations and treatment initiatives are occurring.
      These include an experimental ketamine detox service being trialled in
      Devon and a UK ketamine-addiction-urology research group being set up
      between the CPU and UCLH (with Dr Dan Wood, urologist); the CPU is also
      collaborating with the Bristol Drugs Project [h].
    Using the Alexander Fleming Award, we are making a DVD with `gangs' of
      young people who have written a rap about our cannabinoid discoveries
      backed by a professional video animation. This will be shown and piloted
      in schools before being released on the web.
    We have engaged widely with the media in order to disseminate our
      research findings to as wide an audience as possible [i]. In 2010
      our discovery that CBD blocked the memory impairing effects of THC made
      the front page of Nature news. An article in Newsweek based on the same
      finding bemoaned the lack of similar research being done in the USA. The
      CPU labs and our naturalistic studies were filmed by BBC3 as the central
      science content of the documentary `How Drugs Work: Cannabis' (first
      transmitted in January 2011). Curran has been interviewed about ketamine
      on Woman's Hour on BBC Radio 4) and for the Telegraph and also contributed
      to a podcast which is available on the website of the British Journal of
      Psychiatry.
    In 2012, we (Curran and David Nutt, Imperial) conducted a live fMRI study
      of the effects of MDMA, which formed the basis of a two-part documentary,
      `Drugs Live: the ecstasy trial', funded and broadcast by Channel 4. This
      was watched by over two million people across the UK (audience of 1.92m on
      first episode, Wed 26th Sept 2012) and prompted the biggest
      online debate of any programme on that channel to date (including twitter,
      Channel 4's own data, newspapers, podcasts). The programme was described
      by C4's commissioning editor as "a programme that only Channel 4 would be
      brave enough to transmit" [j].
    
ImpactSummary

    Our research on cannabis, ketamine and MDMA (ecstasy) has used pioneering
      methods to provide a unique new evidence-base on which illegal drugs can
      be evaluated. This work has influenced government policy and legal
      proceedings in the UK and abroad. We have engaged widely with drug users,
      other members of the public, drug services and the media to disseminate
      our findings widely, and increase public knowledge of the topic. Our
      research on the effects of recreational drug use thus has changed national
      and international media discourse about this topic, and has increased
      public awareness and engagement.
    
UnderpinningResearch

    The UCL Clinical Psychopharmacology Unit (CPU), under the direction of
      Professor Val Curran, has pioneered human research on the effects of major
      recreational drugs. We have carried out acute challenge studies in the
      laboratory, as holders of a Home Office licence for this type of work. We
      have also undertaken chronic naturalistic studies with drug users, where
      samples of drugs are taken for biological analyses. Finally, we have
      performed naturalistic studies, setting up mobile laboratory conditions in
      nightclubs. This case study describes the research and impact relating to
      three major drugs we have studied: cannabis, ketamine and MDMA
      (`ecstasy').
    In the largest ever study of its kind, we tested 620 cannabis
      users aged 16 to 23 both when intoxicated with their chosen cannabis and
      when sober [1, 2]. Through this research, we demonstrated why some
      individuals are more vulnerable than others to the harmful effects of
      cannabis. Cannabis contains around 100 unique ingredients
      (`cannabinoids'), of which THC is the cannabinoid that users seek (it
      makes them `stoned'). We discovered that the second most abundant
      cannabinoid in herbal and resin forms of cannabis &#8212; cannabidiol (CBD) &#8212;
      protects against the harmful amnesic and addiction-related effects of THC.
      This has also deepened our understanding of the dangers of `skunk' &#8212; a
      type of cannabis with high levels of THC but virtually no CBD. This
      research was funded by three MRC grants. In recognition of the importance
      of these findings, Curran received an award under the MRC Alexander
      Fleming Dissemination Scheme (2012-4) to fund the dissemination of these
      new discoveries about cannabis to young people across the UK. This
      discovery is now being translated into the clinic as Curran and Morgan
      have received new MRC funding of &#163;1.5m (2013-7) for a trial of CBD in
      treating cannabis addiction.
    Over 90% of research to date on ketamine abuse has been carried
      out by the CPU. Ketamine is an important medicine in both specialist
      anaesthesia and pain management; it is also being studied as a potential
      antidepressant. At the same time, its use as a recreational drug has
      spread in many parts of the world over the past few years. It is now the
      fourth most popular club drug in the UK and the top drug of abuse in Hong
      Kong. By accumulating a large population of users engaged in our research,
      and following them in a 12-month ESRC-funded longitudinal study, the CPU
      has discovered that frequent use of the drug is associated with both
      neurocognitive impairment and addiction. It can also produce physical
      harms including ketamine-induced ulcerative cystitis which may require
      bladder removal and replacement [3, 4].
    Since discovering the `mid-week blues' that followed acute MDMA
      (`ecstasy') use in the first study of its kind (a laboratory at a `rave')
      [5], the CPU has determined the long-term effects of this drug,
      finding that neurocognitive function, altered mood and serotonergic
      changes whilst individuals take this drug are attenuated if not fully
      reversed after use is stopped [6]. This research has been funded
      by a range of agencies (e.g. ARUK, Parkinson Disease Society) and most
      recently our neuroimaging study of acute MDMA was funded by Channel 4
      television.
    