CaseStudyId: 38185
Title: 
    vCJD prion infection: improving diagnosis and surveillance
    

ImpactDetails

    Our blood test is now in use at the National Prion Clinic (NPC) to allow
      diagnosis of vCJD. The immediate impact of this is that patients can be
      diagnosed quickly, other conditions can be excluded, and care plans can be
      put in place quickly. Impacts currently at an interim stage are the
      development of high throughput tests for screening blood in transfusion
      services both in the UK and overseas.
    Using the existing World Health Organisation diagnostic criteria for
      vCJD, disease can only be classified as `probable' in the presence of
      significant neurological deficit and confirmed as `definite' by means of
      neuropathological examination. Despite their relentlessly progressive
      nature and devastating prognosis, securing a firm early diagnosis for
      these disorders remains crucial. This is firstly as the differential
      diagnosis of prion disease includes potentially reversible conditions,
      such as limbic encephalitis caused by voltage gated potassium channel
      antibodies, or primary central nervous system (CNS) vasculitis. Secondly,
      early diagnosis removes uncertainty, which in itself is distressing, and
      obviates the need for further investigation. Patient care plans can be
      established, patients and families counselled accordingly and appropriate
      infection control measures implemented [a]. Introduction of a
      sensitive and specific blood-based molecular diagnostic test for prion
      disease will facilitate early disease diagnosis and entry into therapeutic
      trials. In addition, such a test has obvious applications in reducing
      iatrogenic transmission of disease, screening of blood products for
      transfusion, food and medicinal products.
    The National Prion Clinic (NPC) is the national referral centre for prion
      disease and is based at the National Hospital for Neurology and
      Neurosurgery [b]. The clinic is integrally linked with the MRC
      Prion Unit. Our blood test is in increasing diagnostic use in the NPC and
      samples are received for investigation from neurologists both nationally
      and internationally. Approximately 115 patients have been tested so far
      through the clinic [c]. In addition to its immediate clinical use
      the test is suitable for screening applications as an extended validation
      series of 5,000 control samples demonstrated that the test is 100%
      specific for prion disease.
    A study by the Health Protection Agency (HPA) to determine the prevalence
      of prion infection in solid organs released preliminary results in August
      2012 [d]. They found 16 definitively positive appendices out of
      32,441 suitable samples examined, equating to a final prevalence estimate
      of 493 per million (95% CI: 282 to 801 per million). The central estimate
      of around 1 infection per 2,000 UK citizens is clearly alarming coupled
      with the known potential for transmission via blood transfusion, and
      demonstrates the long-term significance of our work. [text removed for
      publication].
    Although the number of transfusion recipients positively identified as
      having received packed red cells contaminated with vCJD is small, much
      larger cohorts of at-risk individuals exist including around 6,000
      recipients of contaminated plasma products, haemophiliacs and
      thalassaemics.
    Other groups identified and also notified by the HPA as being at
      heightened risk of prion disease include the highly transfused, surgical
      contacts of prion disease patients and recipients of cadaver- derived
      human growth hormone. Whilst most notified individuals appear to
      understand and accommodate the health protection message, it is not
      surprising that the NHS National Prion Clinic is regularly referred and
      counsels distressed individuals in such risk groups who may also have had
      their healthcare disrupted by misunderstanding on the part of NHS
      professionals. The availability of a blood test will provide better risk
      assessment and resolve issues of personal risk in notified groups [a].
    Several commercial organisations have had historical interest in
      developing a blood test for prion disease but abandoned their research
      efforts after reaching the conclusion it was not possible. As a result
      there is renewed interest within industry to develop such tests, knowing
      that blood does contain sufficient abnormal PrP for detection. The test
      has been patented as a step towards commercialisation [e].
    vCJD has been the subject of intense public and policy debate;
      publication in the Lancet of our blood test method and preliminary results
      has resulted in considerable press coverage. Recent press reports (for
      example, The Telegraph, 28 April 2013) have highlighted the
      importance of a blood test in protecting public health in the UK with
      predictions of up to 1,000 people likely to die from vCJD as a result of
      receiving contaminated transfused blood. Coverage in the Daily Mail,
      3 February 2011, attracted comments from members of the public welcoming
      the test and wishing for reassurance that they were not at risk [f].
    
ImpactSummary

    The MRC Prion Unit was established at UCL in 1998 to address national
      public health issues posed by bovine spongiform encephalopathy (BSE) and
      variant Creutzfeldt-Jakob disease (vCJD). One of our key strategic
      priorities has been to create a validated blood test for vCJD in order to
      protect public health through the screening of donated blood and organs
      for transplantation. The blood test we have developed has been
      demonstrated to detect infection in over 70% of patients with vCJD with,
      to date, 100% specificity and is now in use at the National Prion Clinic
      for evaluation.
    
UnderpinningResearch

    Prion diseases remain a strategic priority area for both the MRC and the
      Department of Health, with early diagnosis a key aim. The confirmation of
      blood transfusion-associated vCJD has highlighted the need to advance
      blood-based diagnostics for prion infection to protect the UK blood
      supply. Further, the advances in therapeutics research in the Unit and
      Department of Neurodegenerative Disease necessitate parallel advances in
      early diagnosis and progression biomarkers to support imminent clinical
      trials.
    Detection of disease-associated, abnormal forms of the prion protein such
      as PrPSc is the most specific criterion for the diagnosis of
      prion disease in humans and animals. However, the high specificity
      associated with PrPSc detection has always been counterbalanced
      by a limit on the sensitivity of detection. Research led by Professor John
      Collinge over the past few years has been successful in identifying new
      methods for the specific detection of abnormal forms of PrP without
      sacrificing sensitivity. These methods have been used in conjunction with
      our own monoclonal antibodies generated against unique, alternative folded
      conformers of PrP to develop sensitive ELISA and western blot methods
      capable of diagnosing prion infection from neural or tonsillar tissue
      biopsies.
    Although the quantities of PrPSc deposited in neural tissues
      are sufficient during the symptomatic phase of illness for detection by
      conventional immunoassays, quantification of infectious titre using rodent
      models has indicated that the levels of infectivity in blood are extremely
      low and over a million-fold lower than in infected CNS material. Ongoing
      research studying the interaction of PrP with metals [1, 2] has
      led to the development of methods for the selective capture of PrPSc
      and prions on solid-state surfaces [3]. Combining our capture
      technologies with cells selected for susceptibility to prion infection has
      allowed us to describe quantitative cell culture assays for infectivity
      that approach the high levels of sensitivity required to detect the low
      levels of prions and abnormal PrP associated with blood [4, 5]. A
      similar approach has been adopted for the capture of abnormal PrP from
      whole human blood using an optimised solid-state capture matrix derived
      from investigation of an extensive range of potential binding surfaces
      coupled with direct immunodetection of the surface-bound material. The use
      of whole blood as an analyte ensures that all abnormal PrP is available
      for detection in the assay irrespective of which compartment it is
      associated with. Our previous work developing antibodies and methods for
      abnormal PrP detection avoids use of any proteolytic processing ensuring
      all abnormal PrP isoforms are available for detection.
    The combination of our endeavours in monoclonal antibody production and
      selective capture of abnormal PrP have resulted in the first available
      blood test for vCJD [6]. The assay has been validated on a large
      set of samples from the USA, where exposure to BSE can be considered
      negligible, and has a determined specificity of 100% whilst retaining
      sensitivity for infection of 71%. The blood test is now in routine use
      within the National Prion Clinic as part of patient assessment and
      differential diagnosis.
    Researchers
    Professor John Collinge, Professor Charles Weissman, Dr Graham S Jackson,
      Dr Julie A Edgeworth, Dr Simon Mead
    