CaseStudyId: 38201
Title: 
    Oral epidemiology and the use of subjective measures of oral health and
      quality of life
    

ImpactDetails

    Enhancing delivery of oral health care in local services
    In 2009, Camden and Islington PCT used the OIDP to undertake a survey of
      the dental needs of elderly people in nursing homes. This indicated high
      levels of unmet treatment need and considerable impacts of oral conditions
      on the daily lives of older residents. As a result, in 2012 Camden and
      Islington PCT established oral health measures as a key component of their
      local standards for residential homes in Islington. Homes must now ensure
      that all new residents receive an oral health assessment to identify and
      arrange urgent treatment; the oral hygiene practice of all residents
      should be recorded daily; a referral system for attendance to the dentist
      must be put in place for those in need; nursing home staff are trained to
      undertake the above oral health related tasks. In practical terms, care
      has been improved and existing resources more effectively employed. There
      is a more immediate recognition of oral disease and increased numbers of
      residents have been referred to the Community Dental Services to receive
      treatment. In addition, North Central London NHS commissioned the
      provision of high concentration fluoride toothpaste to cover the
      preventive needs of those residents identified as at risk for oral
      diseases [a, b].
    In 2010, the OIDP was a major component of a needs assessment survey
      carried out at Holloway Prison, London. This found that 73% of prisoners
      reported at least one oral impact on daily performances. Prisoners were
      more likely than the general female population to engage in oral health
      damaging behaviours such as high sugar intake and smoking. This has led to
      the London Borough of Islington/NHS North Central London commissioning the
      Kent Community Health NHS Trust to provide an enhanced oral health
      promotion service in HMP Holloway for 2013-14 [a].
    Finally, as a result of our epidemiological work, Islington carried out a
      pilot community-based fluoride varnish programme in 2010. The success of
      this project led to Islington Clinical Commissioning Group investing in a
      community-based fluoride varnish scheme. In the scheme fluoride varnish is
      applied, twice a year, to the teeth of 6,000 children attending children's
      centres, community nurseries and schools in the most deprived areas of
      Islington [a, c].
    Use in major national surveys of Dental Health
    Since 1968, a national adult oral health survey has been conducted in the
      UK every 10 years. In 2008 the UCL Dental Public Health Group joined the
      Office for National Statistics, National Centre for Social Research and a
      consortium of universities including Newcastle, Birmingham, Cardiff and
      Dundee to conduct the 2009 Adult Dental Health Survey (ADHS) for England,
      Wales and Northern Ireland. The OIDP was included in this survey for the
      first time to assess how severely oral health problems impacted on the
      ability of people to carry out basic functions of their daily life [d].
      The ADHS 2009 results have been used by the NHS to shape the planning and
      commissioning of the NHS dental services. NHS England report that this
      survey "is pivotal to our planning oral health services. [Its findings]
        point to a reduction in dental caries and rates of restoration, a very
        rapid reduction in edentulousness in old age and the emergence of an
        ageing population of adults with heavy restoration and potentially
        complex needs. Our services and workforce continues to develop to
        address the needs that arise in the knowledge of what we expect to see"
      [e].
    In 2009, the Child-OIDP was used by the NHS Dental Epidemiology Programme
      (NHS DEP) for England in their national survey of child dental health. The
      programme report that: "The information produced from the nationally
        coordinated surveys of child dental health is used by PCTs when
        conducting oral health needs assessments at local level and forms an
        important component of the commissioning of local services" [f].
      Subsequently the Child-OIDP has been included in the Children's Dental
      Health Survey which is due to be conducted in England, Wales and Northern
      Ireland in autumn 2013.
    The OIDP and Child-OIDP have also been used in national dental health
      surveys in Norway, Brazil, Thailand and Korea. For example, a recent
      national survey of children and adolescents in Thailand included the
      assessment of oral health-related quality of life by using the Child-OIDP
      and OIDP indices in 12- and 15-year-old groups. This showed that in
      general oral impacts were quite prevalent, with dental caries affecting
      children's quality of life most (accounting for 50% of overall oral
      impacts), while aphthous stomatitis and gingivitis negatively affected the
      QoL of between a quarter and a third of the population. As a result of
      this survey, the Dental Health Division of the Thailand Department of
      Health set new oral health goals across the country to cover the aspect of
      oral health-related quality of life [g].
    Influencing policy debate in Europe
    Through his involvement in the European Association of Dental Public
      Health (EADPH), Tsakos has been instrumental in the establishment of the
      Platform for Better Oral Health in Europe, a European-wide initiative
      supported by the EADPH, the Association for Dental Education in Europe,
      the Council of European Chief Dental Officers, and the International
      Dental Health Foundation [h]. This forum aims to facilitate
      communication and engagement with key stakeholders and non-clinical
      audiences in terms of policy development and priority setting for the EU.
      It promotes oral health and the cost-effective prevention of oral diseases
      in Europe and provides recommendations to policymakers with regard to EU
      oral health policy developments. Through his epidemiological and QoL
      expertise, Tsakos has represented the Platform in meetings with key policy
      makers including European Commission officials (e.g. Deputy
      Director-General of DG SANCO) and European Parliament members.
      Furthermore, the UCL DPH group epidemiological research has been widely
      used to inform the Platform's reports and policy debate documents. As a
      result, 2020 targets for improved oral health in Europe were established,
      and a Europe-wide consultation has begun [i].
    
ImpactSummary

    Research by the UCL Dental Public Health Group has led the international
      field in the development and validation of quality of life (QoL) measures
      associated with oral health. Tsakos and Sheiham instigated the development
      of the Oral Impacts on Daily Performances (OIDP) measure in 1996 followed
      by the Child Oral Impacts on Daily Life (Child-OIDP) in 2004. Both of
      these outcome measures have been employed in epidemiological surveys of
      needs assessment by local health providers in London resulting in enhanced
      use of resources, better staff training, and improved patient care and
      health care access. These measures have been employed in the most
      significant NHS surveys of oral health of adults and children in the UK as
      well as used by health organisations across the globe. The outcomes of
      Tsakos' research on oral epidemiology and QoL, together with engagement
      with policy makers in the UK and Europe, have raised the profile of oral
      health and is influencing health care policies nationally and
      internationally.
    
UnderpinningResearch

    Understanding the quality of life (QoL) of individuals is cardinal in the
    delivery of all health care as it provides a means to evaluate the personal
    and social impact of disease and its treatment and thus provides a more
    rounded appreciation of disease than clinically-derived markers alone.
    Researchers within UCL Dental Public Health (DPH) have undertaken an
    extensive programme of research into the theoretical basis, development,
    psychometric testing and application of oral health related quality of life
    (OHRQoL) measures in the UK and internationally. These outcome measures have
    been further employed in oral epidemiology through a variety of studies and
    provided relevant information for the provision of services to improve the
    oral health of the population.
    In 1996, the UCL DPH group developed the Oral Impacts on Daily
      Performances (OIDP) index [1]. This outcome measure assesses oral
      impacts that seriously affect a person's daily life and was based on the
      WHO conceptual framework for the International Classification of
      Impairments, Disabilities and Handicaps. Over the following years we went
      on to adapt and evaluate this measure in different settings and cultures
      and there is evidence of its use in 23 countries. For example, in 2001 we
      demonstrated that the OIDP is a valid and reliable measure of oral
      health-related quality of life in elderly people in Great Britain and
      Greece [2].
    In 2004 we developed a relevant QoL measure for use with children aged 8+
      years (the Child-OIDP) in a study of children in Thailand [3]. We
      then evaluated the Child-OIDP for use among children in the UK [4]
      and it has since been used in 14 different countries, including in
      national epidemiological surveys.
    In addition to the development of these outcome measures, we have also
      made methodological advances in the administration and interpretation of
      OHRQoL measures. For example, in 2008 we developed self-administered
      versions of OIDP and Child-OIDP which have allowed wider use in clinical
      and epidemiological studies [5]. Our work has also set recommended
      standards for reporting and interpreting OHRQoL measures [6].
    We have since gone on to lead the practical application of OHRQoL
      measures for assessing oral health needs and planning services. We have
      formulated a socio-dental approach to needs assessment, which we have
      tested in Thailand (2006), Korea (2009) and Malaysia (2012) and have
      demonstrated the applicability and relevance of this socio-dental approach
      for different populations. We have developed pathways for assessing oral
      health needs which incorporate measures of:
    i. clinical oral health,
      ii. OHRQoL (determined by OIDP or Child-OIDP according to the age of the
      population)
      iii. behavioural propensity
    We have further applied these measures to determine the impact of
      specific oral disorders (e.g. aphthous stomatitis, gingivitis,
      malocclusion) upon QoL of affected children and adult populations and to
      assess the outcomes of clinical interventions (e.g. periodontal therapy) [7],
      thus providing relevant data for planning and evaluating primary and
      secondary oral health care services.
    