CaseStudyId: 38247
Title: 
    Developing methods to measure and quantify amorphous content in
      micronised particles, leading to improved manufacture and performance of
      inhaled drug delivery devices
    

ImpactDetails

    The inhalation device market is predicted to reach a value of
      approximately $20 billion by 2017 [a]. This approach provides
      essential, and often life-saving, therapy for the management of a range of
      diseases including asthma and chronic obstructive pulmonary disease.
      Inhalation therapies are in development for both treatment of infection
      and gene therapy for cystic fibrosis, as are many systemic delivery
      therapies for conditions such as migraine, sexual dysfunction and pain
      control. The need for control and understanding of inhalation products is
      therefore critical.
    Inhalation particles are inevitably small (less than 5 microns is the
      norm) or at least of low aerodynamic size. The large
      surface-area-to-volume ratio of small particles makes them very sensitive
      to changes in surface properties. In the 1980s and early 1990s there was
      an awareness that batch-to-batch variation in performance was common, but
      at that time, all the available analytical techniques (such as
      differential scanning calorimetry and powder X-ray diffraction) would show
      every sample to be identical. There was an urgent need to develop
      analytical methods which were at least as sensitive as the product in
      terms of a material's properties.
    The understanding, developed to a large part from the work described
      above, that micronised material will have amorphous content and that the
      presence of that amorphous content will give rise to variability in the
      manufacture and performance of inhalation products is now well
      established. In particular, isothermal microcalorimetry is now a standard
      means of measuring amorphous content, as pioneered by Buckton. Widespread
      use of this method has had a profound effect on sales of related
      instruments within the pharmaceutical industry. A microcalorimetry expert
      associated with instrument sales stated: "The realisation that the
        instruments can detect small quantities of amorphous material changed
        [the] sales profile totally and annual sales to this sector increased 5
        fold in the period from mid-1990s onwards and maintained at this level
        for a decade. The market is even more buoyant now with new applications
        but the core solid state pharmaceutical market is still the basis of our
        market leading position. Key to the solid state application is Graham
        Buckton's initial amorphicity studies where the methods he developed are
        still used, almost unchanged, today" [b]. In addition, the
      use of gravimetric vapour sorption, new scanning calorimetric techniques
      and spectroscopies have all contributed to the science and understanding
      of partially amorphous materials.
    The methods developed in the work described above allow for reliable
      quantification of amorphous content in micronised powders. The impact of
      the body of work has therefore been to profoundly influence the current
      industrial practices associated with quality control of powders for
      inhalation as well as the choice, development and indeed sales of
      methodologies associated with measuring small quantities of amorphous
      material. A materials scientist working in product development at GSK
      said: "the work he has conducted has influenced the way in which we
        characterise inhaled products (a major market at GSK worth some &#163;7.3b in
        2012). The key findings that we picked up at GSK were the development of
        methodologies in which very small amounts of amorphous material could be
        measured...we developed our material characterisation procedures with
        his papers very much in mind" [c]. Furthermore, a drug
      product design scientist at Pfizer has confirmed: "The work performed
        by Graham's group on using a range of techniques to detect these small
        amounts of amorphous material has been seminal in developing the control
        strategy for pharmaceutical materials. We currently have isothermal
        microcalorimetry and solution calorimetry instruments for precisely this
        purpose and have developed the use of the approaches developed by Graham
        into material characterisation and drug product design" [d].
    As well as influencing industrial practice, the work outlined above was
      also central to the creation in 2000 of Pharmaterials Ltd, a spin-out
      company from the School of Pharmacy [e]. This company provides
      consultancy and expertise to large and small pharma and related
      industries, with a particular (initial) specialisation being the physical
      characterisation of drugs, excipients and dosage forms based on the body
      of work developed by Buckton. The company has since grown to include
      formulation, analytical sciences, stability and manufacturing of clinical
      trial supplies and at the present time is involved with all aspects of
      product development. In January 2008, Pharmaceutics International
      Incorporated USA (PII) acquired a majority shareholding in Pharmaterials [f].
      [text removed for publication] [g]. The company have
      invested [text removed for publication] on equipment since
      acquisition [h], and there has also been substantial spend on the
      new building [i] reflecting the manner in which the
      characterisation research has translated into commercial activity.
    The company provides a service for GMP-compliant measurement of amorphous
      content for many companies, including active ingredient manufacturers, SME
      development companies and large multinationals. Initially, this service
      was offered in a problem-solving capacity, but with the changing
      regulatory environment (see below), the data generated by Pharmaterials
      are now used in the development of product specifications and are
      submitted to regulatory authorities around the world. Pharmaterials now
      uses the knowledge of this materials science in order to provide a full
      inhalation development service. [text removed for publication] [g].
    In addition to these activities, the research has also influenced
      regulatory processes. In 2002, the US Food and Drug Administration (FDA)
      invited Buckton to advise on developing a regulatory framework for
      amorphous materials [j]. It subsequently became a requirement for
      all new low molecular weight drugs for powder inhalation to be tested for
      amorphous material as part of the regulatory process. The US Pharmacopoeia
      followed the FDA's position in developing their standards and specify the
      use of microcalorimetry to measure amorphous content [k]. In the
      UK, Buckton served on the MHRA's Committee on Safety of Medicines, where
      he similarly advised on amorphous materials. It is now also a requirement
      in Europe that inhalation materials are tested for amorphous content prior
      to licensing [l].
    
ImpactSummary

    Graham Buckton's work at the UCL School of Pharmacy has involved the
      development of new techniques, which are now industry standards, for
      assessing the amorphous content of materials in inhalation products. This
      work has had a significant influence on both manufacturing quality control
      and regulatory requirement, including informing FDA policy, to the effect
      that this type of assessment is now a requirement for licensing of powder
      inhalation medicines in the US and Europe. Benefits to drug companies
      include cost savings and more reliable production. Furthermore, the
      associated School of Pharmacy spin-out company, Pharmaterials, offers
      these assessments as a core part of its commercial activity, with a large
      client base of industrial partners who require such assessments for their
      inhalation and other products. The overall result of this work has been
      changes and improvements in the design, control and manufacture of
      inhalation products.
    
UnderpinningResearch

    The drug and excipient powders used for inhalation aerosols have to be of
      specific size in order to allow appropriate drug deposition in the lung,
      hence they are often processed using techniques such as micronisation to
      control the particle properties. However, it is well recognised that this
      process may cause unforeseen changes in performance; linked in to this is
      the issue of batch-to-batch variation, whereby seemingly identical
      materials perform very differently. The research of the group of Buckton
      has focused for the last 20 years on understanding the underpinning
      reasons for these performance changes and developing methods whereby such
      alterations may be identified and quantified. More specifically, he has
      produced a considerable body of work demonstrating that subtle changes in
      surface properties, notably including the generation of surface amorphous
      material, may give rise to significant changes in performance. However as
      the surface only constitutes a very small proportion of the bulk of a
      solid material, detection of such changes requires the development of
      sophisticated and sensitive methodologies. It is in this area of
      methodology development that Buckton's work has made, and continues to
      make, a particularly significant contribution.
    In the 1990s Buckton's laboratory was extremely active in developing the
      use of isothermal microcalorimetry for the detection of surface
      amorphisation, whereby by inducing crystallisation in the material, the
      associated heat change could be detected with enormous sensitivity,
      thereby allowing very small amounts of amorphous material to be detected.
      In particular, his group were instrumental in developing a modified
      calorimetry cell whereby humidity could be controlled and hence used to
      induce crystallisation. A key development was a publication in 1994, in
      collaboration with scientists in Astra Draco (now AstraZeneca), which
      showed that this method was able to detect minute quantities of
      crystallisable amorphous content present in micronised materials [1].
      It was then possible to remove the amorphous material by annealing,
      resulting in a material that would be consistent in performance.
    The development of isothermal microcalorimetry, through a series of
      publications in which Buckton's group played a leading role (e.g. [2]),
      led to this being used as the method of choice by the industry for the
      determination of amorphous contents in micronised materials. The group
      continued to develop innovative methods for amorphous content detection
      including gravimetric [3] approaches, solution calorimetry [4],
      a novel gravimetric-near IR instrument (constructed in house) [5],
      and the development of a novel inverse gas chromatography approach [6]
      and fast scan differential scanning calorimetry [7]. The combined
      output of this research revealed not only that micronisation can generate
      partial amorphicity in otherwise crystalline materials but also that by
      appropriate measurement it was possible to detect quantities well under 1%
      of the total particle mass. The research described above was carried out
      from 1993 until the present date through a variety of collaborations with
      industrial companies, all of whom now apply this research concept. The
      co-authors on the publications cited include a number of industrial
      collaborators, as well as members of Buckton's group.
    