CaseStudyId: 38633
Title: 
    Phyllida Barlow: Shaping a new understanding of sculpture
    

ImpactDetails

    Rooted in over 20 years of research at the Slade, Phyllida Barlow's
      approach to sculpture
      represents a new and appropriate response to an age of austerity. Her
      choice of materials -
      recycled and taken from familiar, non-art, urban contexts, and her use of
      paint &#8212; is one of the ways
      that her work promotes new forms of engagement with sculpture, including
      debate about its value.
      She creates a dialogue/tension between the experience of the sculpture in
      the gallery and the
      everyday, familiar experience and visual vocabulary of non-art objects and
      materials in the urban
      space outside. The scale, impermanence, site specificity and
      precariousness of her work expand
      on this tension.
    Since her retirement in October 2009, Barlow has continued to develop and
      meditate on the same
      research questions and themes she formulated during her time at UCL. As an
      Evening Standard
      review of her 2011 show at Hauser and Wirth notes: "There is... an energy
      about Barlow's
      exhibitions that evokes an art that has been honed over several decades
      and suddenly unleashed"
      [1]. The outputs of her underpinning research delivered a range of
      benefits including Barlow's
      development of original art and support for innovative forms of
        artistic expression. The
      impacts of her work extend to public discussion and debate about the value
      of sculpture, prompted
      in part by her creation of dialogue and tension between experiencing
      sculpture in the gallery, and
      the everyday, familiar experience and visual vocabulary of non-art objects
      and materials in the
      urban space. The development and exhibition of her work and its capacity
      to engage public
      audiences in new ways has contributed both to the general cultural
        life in the UK and abroad,
        and to the success of the cultural and artistic organisations at which
        her work is shown.
    Her receipt in 2007 of the prestigious Paul Hamlyn Foundation's Award for
      Artists enabled Barlow's
      further development of the practices for which she is now well known.
      These resulted, during the
      period leading up to and following her retirement, in a significant series
      of exhibitions and
      commissions emerging directly from her Slade research. Those exhibitions enhanced
        the offering
        provided by the cultural and artistic organisations in which they
      have been shown, where they
      have reached and contributed to the visitor experiences of very
      wide public audiences. Notable
      examples include STINT, [f, above]; STACK, Southbank
      Centre, London, 2008 (Southbank Centre
      average daily footfall 50k) [2]; BRAKE, One in the Other Gallery,
      London, 2009; SWAMP, V22,
      London 2010; BLUFF, Studio Voltaire, London 2010; STREET,
      Bawag Contemporary, Vienna,
      Austria 2010; Nairy Baghramian and Phyllida Barlow, Serpentine
      Gallery, London 2010; and
      CAST, Kunstverein N&#252;rnberg, Germany 2011.
    Since 2010, Barlow has been represented by major international commercial
      gallery Hauser and
      Wirth, at whose London space she presented the critically acclaimed solo
      show RIG in 2011. This
      drew upon the research methods she developed earlier in its use of
      everyday materials, in its
      approach to scale and in engaging with each nook and cranny of the wide
      range of spaces in the
      Piccadilly building, from basement safe to attic. RIG appeared
      soon after her 2010 Serpentine
      Gallery show, in which Barlow and her co-exhibitor, Nairy Baghramian,
      presented a dialogue
      between two different, yet related, positions on contemporary sculpture.
      The exhibition, which
      attracted 43,893 visitors (averaging over 1,100 per day), drew significant
      public attention to key
      questions explored in her research [3], and both RIG and the
      Serpentine show were important
      channels for the communication of Barlow's research insights to a wider
      audience, and for
      engaging that audience in contemporary conversations about the nature of
      sculpture. In addition, it
      engaged an already art-interested audience. Moreover, the Serpentine
      exhibition was
      accompanied by activities for traditionally harder-to-reach audiences,
      including a series of 16
      workshops with a total of 492 participants; of these, two were for the New
      River College Pupil
      Referral Unit (for children excluded from education) and four for Open
      Age, a charity for older
      people in Westminster.
    The impact of Barlow's work on public engagement with issues raised in
      her research has been
      extended through coverage in media discourse about contemporary art. BRAKE,
      for example, was
      reviewed in the Guardian, and RIG received widespread
      media coverage, including an interview in
      the Financial Times and reviews on many blogs and in the Evening
        Standard [1]. Naming it his
      exhibition of the week, Ben Luke wrote in the latter: "You'd never
      describe the sculptures of this
      remarkable artist as figurative, they are resolutely abstract, and yet by
      throwing together base and
      artless materials into dramatic gestures in the gallery space, she manages
      to evoke so eloquently
      what it is to inhabit a human body making its way through the world" [1].
      The Serpentine exhibition
      itself, and the socio-cultural and artistic issues it raised, also
      received widespread popular and
      critical attention, with national and international media coverage
      including in the Independent,
      Guardian, Sunday Times, Sculpture and Art
        Review [4]. Siege, Barlow's first solo show in New
      York (May-June 2012) [5], was shown at the New Museum, Manhattan's only
      dedicated
      contemporary art museum, and was extremely well received both in the New
        York Times and
      elsewhere. Hyperallergenic, a top New York arts `blog-zine' with
      250,000 unique visitors per
      month, welcomed this `Lesson from an Unknown Master' and called her art
      "amongst the best we
      have" [5]. Massimiliano Gioni, Associate Director and Director of
      Exhibitions at the New Museum
      went on to include Barlow's work in The Encyclopedic Palace, the
      centrepiece exhibition of the
      55th Venice Biennale (1 June-24 November 2013) for which he was Artistic
      Director.
    Despite her emphasis on impermanence, ephemeral materials and recycling,
      Barlow's work is now
      much in demand among collectors internationally and has thus provided a significant
contribution
        to global cultural heritage. A number of works were acquired by
      important national
      and international public collections. The Contemporary Art Society, who
      gifted 3 works (with
      support from the Art Fund) to Nottingham Castle Museum &amp; Art Gallery
      in 2012, described her
      practice as reflecting "a distinct new direction in contemporary
      sculpture" [6]. Eleven works on
      paper (made between 1990-2006) were purchased by Tate in 2012 and 2
      sculptural works from
      SWAMP were purchased by the Migros Museum f&#252;r Gegenwartskunst,
      Zurich in 2010; [6]. Other
      collections which have acquired Barlow's work include The Government Art
      Collection (2011);
      Ludwig Forum f&#252;r Internationale Kunst, Aachen (2012) and the Henry Moore
      Institute (2012).
    Barlow has made influential contributions to professional and
        artistic practice in terms of the
      contemporary practice and curation of sculpture. Her 2007 project What
        do artists do? [e, above],
      which drew together 16 artists (including three Slade colleagues),
      generated discussion and
      debate about the nature of artistic `making' among artists as well as more
      widely. The increasing
      acceptance by and influence among art professionals of her
      reconceptualisation of the nature and
      role of sculpture is demonstrated by the curation and promotion of her
      work by three of the world's
      most influential museum directors, who share an interest in questions
      around sculpture: Hans
      Ulrich Obrist (Serpentine Gallery); Kaspar K&#246;nig included her in his last
      exhibition at the Museum
      Ludwig, Cologne; and Massimiliano Gioni (New Museum), who included her in
      the 55th Venice
      Biennale as described earlier [7]. It is also demonstrated by her election
      to the Royal Academy in
      2011 and awards including in 2012 the Award for the Most Significant
      Contribution to the
      Development of Contemporary Art at the First Kyiv International Biennale
      of Contemporary Art,
      Ukraine (135k visitors) [8] as well as the award to her in May 2012 of the
      Aachen Art Prize, given
      bi-annually to an artist `whose works have continually given new impetus
      to the international art
      scene'. In making the award, note was made specifically of the `forceful
      connection to place' in
      Barlow's work [9]. Explaining the jury's decision to make the award, the
      Director of the Ludwig
      Forum described Barlow as "....somebody who was developing in such an
      interesting way a new
      term of what sculpture could be, in the very differentiated realm of the
      contemporary world. She's
      somebody who is relating in her thinking to sculpture as well as art
      theory as well as to notions of
      what might public-ness be today: what is a city, how is society
      developing?" [9]. In early summer
      2013 it was announced that Phyllida Barlow had been selected for both the
      prestigious 2013
      Carnegie International and the Tate Britain Duveen Galleries Commission
      2014 [7].
    
ImpactSummary

    Research conducted by Phyllida Barlow at the Slade has had direct and
      indirect impacts on the
      production of new art, on art professionals and the public in their
      relationship to and understanding
      of contemporary sculpture, and on the promotion of public engagement with
      cultural heritage. This
      was achieved through a series of high-profile exhibitions building on her
      research at UCL, which
      demonstrated impact through their increasing profile and public interest,
      responses to her research
      questions in the popular and specialist press, and through the critical
      recognition and artistic
      responses her work received, including acquisitions by major national and
      international collections.
    
UnderpinningResearch

    Phyllida Barlow, now Professor Emerita, taught at the UCL Slade School
      from 1986 until her
      retirement in 2009. Initially part time, she became a full-time Lecturer
      in 1994 and was promoted to
      Reader in 1997, and to Professor of Fine Art in 2005, a position she held
      until retirement. Having
      worked as an artist since the late 1960s, her work has achieved great
      prominence over the last five
      years with the research between 1993 and 2009 representing a move towards
      an `anti-form',
      which, being focused more on process and making than on final results,
      challenged earlier
      generations' traditional aims of monumentality. While historically
      Barlow's work can be seen as
      coming out of a trajectory of artists such as Eva Hesse and Louise
      Bourgeois (on whose work she
      is a recognised expert) her research particularly addressed questions
      about the relationship of
      sculpture to painting and drawing, to the spaces it occupies, and to its
      viewers. In those contexts
      she asked where sculpture goes and who it is `for', examined distinctions
      between public and
      private activity, process and the act/s of making, and explored methods of
      encouraging audiences'
      physical engagement in those acts. Barlow also investigated sculpture as
      an impermanent medium
      by employing quick processes in work with cheap, mundane materials, and by
      actively dismantling
      and recycling the finished works. All of these issues were explored
      through a series of exhibitions,
      lectures, projects and publications, notable examples of which are
      described below.
    The 1993 Objects for... series [a], in which she used improvised
      and found materials to respond to
      awkward domestic and non-Art spaces, underpinned much of Barlow's
      subsequent work. Her
      interest in sculpture as an impermanent medium was reflected in and
      developed through Untitled:
        Dallas (2003) [b], for which Barlow used quick processes and worked
      with cheap, mundane
      materials to construct on-site works interrupting the vast 18x12m
      exhibition space. Her 2004
      exhibition, Peninsula [c], also tested the use of cheap building
      materials including hardboard,
      polystyrene, tape, timber, and fabric combined with direct, on-site
      construction methods to produce
      sculptures exploiting the large exhibition space at the BALTIC Centre for
      Contemporary Art, where
      the ephemeral materials and quick methods of construction contrasted with
      the sculptures' large
      scale. Barlow prompted the audience's physical engagement in the act of
      viewing by locating her
      works in positions that encouraged viewers to look upwards, across,
      through and backwards. The
      balcony overlooking the space provided a view of the installation from the
      floor above, so that
      BALTIC's own architecture also influenced the audience's engagement with
      and experience of
      viewing Peninsula. This approach was re-employed in more recent
      exhibitions, most notably RIG,
      Hauser and Wirth (see Section 4).
    These methods of construction and approach to exploring the relationship
      between sculpture,
      painting, space and viewer were further developed in SKIT (2005),
      a 7-sculpture installation
      commissioned for the two spaces of the Norman Foster-designed Bloomberg
      Space [d]. Here,
      Barlow explored the theatricality of the building's glass-fronted space by
      using its 10m height to
      create another work constructed on site, whose rough and crudely painted
      appearance deliberately
      contrasted with the building's corporate architecture. This structure
      explored a spontaneous
      process of assemblage using specially made components of roughly shaped
      and painted
      polystyrene, foam and canvas and large quantities of paper, fabric and
      polythene bunting, which
      were thrown over a disparate cluster of painted timber lengths reaching up
      to the ceiling.
    Barlow's commitment to using her research to address wider debates about
      the act of `making' is
      evident in her initiation of and contribution to the 2007-9 Arts
      Council-funded project, What do
        Artists Do?. Set up to establish an environment where she and a
      group of artists could engage with
      the processes of making without any expectation that work would be
      produced at their end, What
        do Artists Do? was not intended to culminate in an exhibition
      (although it did, in fact, eventually
      form the basis of SWITCH, 2012, the inaugural show at BALTIC 39)
      [e]. Rather, it documented the
      usually invisible &#8212; but nevertheless essential &#8212; activities through which
      artists produce work.
      Broader issues about the nature and role of sculptural work were also
      explored in STINT, 2008 [f],
      a major new commission for the Mead Gallery. As noted in the press release
      for its catalogue,
      STINT questioned "the nature and role of the sculptural object in
      contemporary culture, utilising an
      extensive, fluid vocabulary and immense enthusiasm for engaging with the
      physical `stuff' of the
      world".
    Throughout this highly active research period, Barlow articulated her
      research themes and insights
      through talks, interviews and essays exploring her position on her own
      practice, the subject of
      sculpture more broadly, and the work of other artists, including Louise
      Bourgeois. A number of
      these were published in her monograph Objects for...and Other Things,
      2004 [a].
    