CaseStudyId: 39044
Title: 
    Creating a new system of environmental regulation, enforcement and
        sanctions
    

ImpactDetails

    Macrory's research has led directly to new laws, regulations and a new
      Environment Tribunal.
    Legislative change: The Government accepted the core
      recommendations in Macrory's 2006 Report [c], and legislated in the Regulatory
        Enforcement and Sanctions Act 2008 [1] for fixed monetary penalties
      and discretionary requirements including:
    
      variable monetary penalties;
      compliance notices;
      restoration notices;
      variable monetary penalties with voluntary undertakings;
      stop notices;
      enforcement undertakings.
    
    The published guidance to the Act explicitly refers to the Macrory Report
      and the fact that the Act directly implements Macrory's recommendations
      [2, pp.6, 17, 28, 43].
    Creation of a new Environment Tribunal: Macrory's 2003 Report [a]
      was the first to advocate a specific model for an environmental tribunal,
      and it has been extensively referred to in discussions and literature
      since then. His 2006 Report [c] then advocated a regulatory appeals
      tribunal where civil sanctions were introduced.
    
      Following the introduction of sanctions in the environmental field in
        2010, the First Tier (Environment) Tribunal was set up in line with
        Macrory's recommendations and was the first such specialist
        environmental court of its kind in the United Kingdom. [17]
      The core recommendations of Macrory's 2011 Report [d] &#8212; that more
        environmental appeals be transferred to the Tribunal and that there be a
        more coherent approach &#8212; have also been accepted in principle by the UK
        Government. [15]
      Many more environmental appeals have now been transferred to the
        Tribunal, including nitrate and emissions trading in 2012, the first
        appeal was handled by the new tribunal in 2012 and proposals to transfer
        further appeals were announced in 2013. [15]
    
    Defra Legal Advisor, explained that "Before Macrory wrote Consistency
        and Effectiveness [d] few here had had the opportunity to step
        back and consider the most effective way to use the First Tier
        (Environment) Tribunal for environmental appeals. The work prompted us
        to consider the issue in the round, and has influenced thinking in
        government. As and when the opportunity arises, appeals are being
        transferred if appropriate to the new tribunal in line with Macrory's
        recommendation" [15].
    Creating a civil sanctions regime for environmental offences: For
      a range of environmental offences committed after 2009, the UK
      Environmental Agency has acquired civil sanction powers in Part III of the
      Regulatory Enforcement &amp; Sanctions Act 2008 [2], the legislation
      implementing Macrory's recommendations [b, c]. In its most recent
      published Enforcement and Sanctions Policy (4/1/2011) the Agency states
      that "when considering the appropriate course of action to address
        offending and to ensure compliance, we aim to follow the penalty
        principles set out in the Macrory Review" [3, p. 4]. In 2011, a
      proposal by Oliver Letwin, Minister of State at the Cabinet Office, to
      scrap the civil sanctions regime sparked debate amongst legal and
      environmental professionals [17]. The Minister's main concern was the
      possible impact on small businesses [11]. Opposition from Letwin and
      others led to a cross-government review. This decided to keep the
      sanctions regime recommended by Macrory in place: in future civil
      sanctions would generally only be available in respect of companies with
      250 plus employees, but offender Enforceable Undertakings (EUs) would be
      available for everyone [18].
    Impact on industry, NGOs and communities: The impact of civil
      sanctions on industry, non- governmental organisations (NGOs) and
      communities has been direct and far-reaching:
    
      The Environment Agency reports that, in the period from January 2012 &#8212;
        July 2013, 67 offender Enforcement Undertakings (EUs) were accepted by
        the Agency [4].
      Under previous regimes, these industries would have been prosecuted
        even where no intention to breach regulations was involved. The
        significance for industry now is that no formal admission of criminal
        guilt is required (which can be a crucial factor for industry in terms
        of reputation and insurability).
      The Agency reports that approximately a third of breaches of
        regulations are now self-reported by industry. Compliant industries
        appreciate that no competitive gain is made since any economic gains
        made by non-compliance, even inadvertently, are taken away in the form
        of donations to third party charities.
      The EUs also benefit charities and local communities. Over &#163;500,000
        has been donated to charities under EUs since January 2012. This
        includes large groups such as the World Wildlife Fund (WWF), but also
        many local environmental groups such as Cheshire Wildlife Trust and
        Young People's Trust for the Environment. Sums range from hundreds to
        tens of thousands of pounds, and for some smaller charities these are
        substantial and crucial to their survival [4,5].
    
    Impact beyond the environment field: As an indication of the reach
      of the impact of Macrory's work in this area, the terms Macrory
          principles and Macrory characteristics have
      become embedded in much of the contemporary institutional language of
      regulatory sanctions, and are used by other regulatory institutions such
      as the Food Standards Agency [6], Office of Fair Trading [7, 1.2, 2.8],
      Office of Water Regulation [8 pp.1, 3, 4, 10] and Civil Aviation Authority
      [9, Annex C, para. 3, 5, 11]. The National Audit Office, for instance,
      states that "The purpose of this programme of `Hampton Implementation
        Reviews' is to provide regulators with a structured check on performance
        against the Hampton principles and the Macrory characteristics."
      [10, p.1]
    Impact beyond England and Wales: While the 2006 Macrory Report
      and proposals were focused on England and Wales, many of the underlying
      principles and ideas have influenced policy development in other parts of
      the UK where devolved governments have been considering the introduction
      of civil sanctions. The Scottish Executive's 2012 Consultation
        Document on Integrated Framework for Environmental Regulation relies
      on the Macrory Report in its proposals for enforcement. It proposes to
      create "a range of flexible and proportionate enforcement options for
        SEPA [Scottish Environmental Protection Agency]" and supported this
      recommendation by stating that Macrory's "research suggests that a
        flexible, proportionate, risk-based approach which utilises a range of
        direct measures by SEPA is the most effective way of enforcing
        legislation" [12 at 3.5.3]. In August 2012 Professor Macrory led a
      special seminar on policy development for SEPA and senior Scottish
      government officials. The Regulatory Reform (Scotland) Bill, introduced to
      the Scottish Parliament on 27 March 2013, proposes a new integrated
      regulatory framework and a broader range of enforcement based on the
      Macrory approach [19].
    Similarly in Northern Ireland (NI), the Department of the Environment
      published a White Paper in 2011, Environmental Better Regulation,
      proposing new administrative penalties and a reform of criminal sanctions.
      It concluded, "The proposed changes are also in keeping with the
        Hampton recommendations on risk-based inspection and the Macrory
        review's recommendations on flexible penalties" [13 p. 23]. In 2012
      Professor Macrory was invited to discuss his proposals with the Minister
      for the Environment and key legal officials in Northern Ireland. In 2013
      the NI Department of the Environment announced Government proposals for
      new Environmental Offences primary legislation that will include the
      introduction of administrative penalties [14 at para. 90]. In 2011
      Professor Macrory was also invited by the Israeli Ministry of Justice to
      lead on his report [c] at a seminar to discuss developing a system of
      administrative penalties for business regulation in Israel. The Ministry's
      Senior Director of Criminal Law explained the influence of the Macrory
      Report saying: "For many of the legal arrangements reached by us we
        relied on your report, which served as an important basic document for
        these arrangements" [16].
    
ImpactSummary

    Research by the UCL Centre for Law and the Environment has directly
      influenced government policy and practice on environmental regulations,
      enforcement and sanctions. It has:
    
      Led to the enactment of government legislation;
      Influenced the creation of a new sanctions policy between the UK
        Environment Agency and private companies;
      Benefited environmental charities and local communities;
      Led to the establishment of a new Environment Tribunal in England and
        Wales;
      Established new regulatory sanctions principles adopted by other
        regulatory agencies;
      Influenced environmental sanctions policies in other jurisdictions.
    
    
UnderpinningResearch

    Professor Richard Macrory joined UCL in 1999 and established the
      Faculty's Centre for Law and the Environment (CLE), with the express
      purpose of creating a new research base in the field of environmental
      regulation. In 2003, he was commissioned by the UK Department for
      Environment, Food and Rural Affairs (Defra) to investigate the possible
      role of a new environmental tribunal. He:
    
      examined over 50 different appeal provisions in environmental
        legislation, and found the system incoherent;
      considered environmental judicial review proceedings and found that
        judicial review applications concerning environmental decisions were
        brought as much by industry as by members of the public or environmental
        organisations.
    
    His 2003 report, Modernising Environmental Justice, Regulation and
        the Role of an Environmental Tribunal [a], recommended an integrated
      appeals system based on a specialised environmental tribunal. His study
      argued this would bring heightened legal authority and coherence to
      environmental regulation and significantly improve confidence in the
      regulated industry, regulatory authorities and the general public.
    Defra then commissioned Macrory to examine the issue of environmental
      civil penalties. His 2003 Report [b] recommended that such penalties could
      play a significant role in achieving more effective regulatory
      enforcement. This report provided the intellectual foundations for his
      subsequent work on civil penalties for the Cabinet Office. For both 2003
      reports, Macrory was assisted by UCL Laws Research Assistant Michael
      Woods.
    Macrory was then invited to give evidence about his research on penalties
      to the 2005 Hampton Review on Business and Regulation, and as a result he
      was appointed by the Cabinet Office to lead a review on regulatory
      sanctions more generally. The Macrory Review [c] looked at the
      main reasons businesses failed to comply with regulations, and what could
      be done to address the situation. The Macrory Review:
    
      considered the work of 56 national regulators and 468 local
        authorities covering almost every area of business regulation;
      included contributions from government departments, regulators,
        judiciary, academics, victims and consumer groups, businesses and trade
        associations.
    
    A report of the Review was published in 2006 by the Cabinet Office: Regulatory
        Justice &#8212; Making Sanctions Effective (the Macrory Report)
      [c]. The Macrory Report proposed six core principles that should
      underlie the design of a modern sanctioning system, plus a number of characteristics
      that all regulators should follow. Its core recommendations included:
    
      designing sanctions in line with these core principles and
        characteristics;
      introducing new civil financial penalties as an alternative to
        criminal sanctions;
      introducing a new type of sanction, "enforceable undertakings",
        negotiated between the regulator and the regulated body;
      setting up pilot schemes to gain restorative justice for regulatory
        non-compliance;
      making available alternative sentencing options in criminal courts;
      introducing new measures to improve transparency and accountability.
    
    In 2010 after a new First Tier (Environment) Tribunal had been created in
      line with Macrory's recommendations, the then Senior President of
      Tribunals (Lord Justice Carnwath) requested that Macrory investigate
      extending the jurisdiction of the new Environment Tribunal to other sorts
      of environmental appeals. His study examined the provisions for
      environmental appeals in over sixty pieces of legislation and conducted
      research with the judiciary and practitioners. It found that the system
      continued to be incoherent and confusing. The study was published in
      Macrory's 2011 report, Consistency and Effectiveness &#8212; Strengthening
        the New Environment Tribunal [d]. This proposed a more coherent
      process with future appeals handled by the Environment Tribunal.
    