CaseStudyId: 39751
Title: 
    An integrated decision-making framework for improving European air
        traffic management
    

ImpactDetails

    Aviation is a strategically important sector that makes a vital
      contribution to the EU`s overall economy and employment, supporting 5.1
      million jobs and contributing &#8364;365 billion to European GDP. Despite the
      recent economic crisis, global air transport over the long term is
      expected to grow by around 5% annually, doubling by 2030. As traffic
      increases so do concerns about capacity and safety. Airport and air
      traffic network capacity is increasingly a constraining factor in European
      air transportation, resulting in delays costing airlines &#8364;1.3-1.9 billion
      per year (European Commission, SESAR, The Future of Flying, 2010,
      www.sesarju.eu). Without a new
      integrated system, current systems will not be able to cope. This will
      result in a potential 3.7 million flights per year not being accommodated,
      causing a yearly loss of approximately &#8364;50 billion euros. Isolated
      improvements in national practices and systems cannot resolve this
      problem, due to segregated systems, lack of standardisation and
      restrictive regulations [3]. However, previous attempts to reach an
      agreement to improve air traffic management systems in Europe had failed
      due to the complexity of reconciling the conflicting objectives of the
      many international stakeholders. The research in section 2 was
      instrumental in resolving this issue.
    The significance of the impact of research was recognised in the many
      nominations received for its benefits to the client organisation from the
      Institute for Operations Research and Management Science (INFORMS) and
      through its publication in the journal Interfaces as an exemplary
      case of research with substantial impact outside academia [4]. In
      particular, the research was a finalist for the Daniel H. Wagner Prize
        for Excellence in Operations Research Practice, the Decision
        Analysis Society Practice Award, and the INFORMS Case
        Competition Award. Eurocontrol's Head of Airport Research and
      Director of the Single European Sky programme, writes that "the research
      [...] had a major impact on one of our major European projects, SESAR
      (Single European Sky Air Traffic Management Research)" [2].
    Impact on the development of the Single European Sky initiative
    The integrated decision-making framework developed by Professor De Reyck
      and described in section 2 was instrumental in reaching an agreement on
      which changes and improvements will be made in Europe's air traffic
      management systems, and which new technologies will be chosen for
      implementation. The selected set of improvements now forms the Master Plan
      of the Single European Sky (SES) initiative for harmonising air traffic
      [1]. This represents the successful development of a collaboration to cope
      with the forecasted increase in air traffic while maintaining safety,
      protecting the environment, and improving predictability and efficiency,
      ultimately leading to the successful completion of the European
      Commission's Single European Sky initiative. When fully realised, the SES
      will handle more than 20 million flights per year, with the highest level
      of safety in the world and cost reductions of &#8364;6 billion per year.
      Additionally, there will be fuel savings, lower CO2 emissions,
      fewer delays and additional capacity, generating an estimated additional
      GDP of &#8364;419 billion for the European economy, and 320,000 jobs [3]. The
      framework developed through our research has created the necessary
      conditions for this to occur.
    The integrated framework accommodates the requirements of a consortium of
      stakeholders from 30 public and private organisations, as well as 20
      associated partners, including representatives from airspace users,
      airports, air navigation service providers, the supply industry, safety
      regulators, military, pilots and controllers associations and research
      centres. Its application has led to a shared understanding of the problem,
      achieved a joint commitment to action, and was used to reach several key
      decisions towards the ultimate implementation of the Single European Sky.
      As a result, implementation of these decisions, as part of a decades-long
      programme, was well underway from 2008 onwards. Some of the key impacts of
      the underpinning research, including the milestones achieved between
      2008-2013, are described below.
    Influence on Eurocontrol
    The research carried out by Professor De Reyck was commissioned by
      Eurocontrol, the European air traffic organisation, who were asked to
      provide technical support, draft regulations and assist in its
      implementation through the SES Air Traffic Management Research (SESAR)
      programme. Using De Reyck's framework, for the first time in the history
      of European air traffic management, all aviation players came together in
      defining, committing to and implementing a pan-European programme. The
      framework is now integrated into the SESAR programme, and used as standard
      methodology for evaluating new technologies and operational improvements.
      As the Head of Airport Research at Eurocontrol and Director of the SES
      programme confirmed, "the developed framework [...] is now integrated into
      Eurocontrol's standard methodology", and that "the framework has [...]
      evolved to fit with the changing nature of the programme" [2]. Professor
      De Reyck's decision-making framework has had a significant impact on
      Eurocontrol, and thus on European aviation, by allowing the former to
      resume its visionary role as facilitators in European aviation decision
      making.
    Impact on technology
    The first agreement reached using the framework concerned Eurocontrol's
      CL-03-02 operational improvement cluster, which described proposed changes
      to arrival and departure support for airports with precision area
      navigation, designed to improve the safety, capacity, and the efficiency
      of terminal area airspace operations. Reaching an agreement around these
      proposals was challenging because of the sheer number of stakeholders
      involved, including the airports, airlines, aircraft manufacturers,
      equipment manufacturers, air navigation service providers, and communities
      around airports. Thanks to the use of the framework, agreements were
      successfully reached on five new technologies and procedures: Precision
      Area Navigation (P-RNAV), Arrival and Departure Management (AMAN/DMAN),
      Wake Vortex detection (WV), Time-Based Separation (TBS) and Basic
      Continuous Descent Approaches (B-CDA). These cases are described in detail
      in [a] and [b] in section 3.
    P-RNAV offers the ability to define routes for the on-board flight
      information management system that best meet the needs of the airport, the
      air traffic controller and the pilot. This results in shorter, more-direct
      routes and improved route adherence and predictability. When environmental
      issues play a major role, the route can be designed to bypass densely
      populated areas. Although all stakeholders believed that there were clear
      environmental and safety benefits from implementing P-RNAV, the larger
      airports feared a negative impact on capacity because they anticipated a
      reduction in the number of holding aircrafts and thus a possible reduction
      of runway utilisation. The framework helped to reach an agreement on the
      implementation of this new technology. Similar consensus issues existed
      around the implementation of AMAN/DMAN, which assists the air traffic
      controller by recommending the optimal arrival and departure sequence,
      thereby increasing capacity and predictability, but reducing the airlines'
      control over departure and arrival times. Similarly, WV and TBS, designed
      to avoid dangerous interactions between airplanes taking off, had
      advantages and disadvantages for each stakeholder involved. Finally, a
      continuous descent approach was designed to reduce nuisance to local
      communities and environmental impact (by lowering fuel consumption when
      landing), but caused concerns for airports, who felt that B-CDA might have
      a negative impact on capacity.
    Impact on increased air traffic efficiency
    By 2012, these technologies and operational changes had been implemented
      at most major European airports [1], and Europe-wide traffic
      synchronisation exercises were held to validate their impact. It was found
      that the traffic synchronisation agreed on through Professor De Reyck's
      decision-making framework led to the following impacts ([5], p. 15):
    - Air traffic control efficiency improved, with a 50% reduction in radio
      telecommunications, a 75% reduction in the need for vectoring;
    - Air space capacity increased by 20%;
    - Runway throughput improved by 4%;
    - Fuel burn was reduced by 2%.
    In addition to these Europe-wide improvements, there were also some
      dramatic local improvements. For instance, the application of AMAN at
      Heathrow has led to a reduction of aircraft stack holding time (aircraft
      circling an airport before its turn to land) by 78-87% ([6] p. 14).
    
ImpactSummary

    An integrated decision-making framework developed by Professor Bert De
      Reyck for Eurocontrol, the European air traffic management organisation,
      was instrumental in reaching an agreement on the changes and technologies
      required to integrate Europe's air traffic management systems. This is as
      part of the European Commission's Single European Sky initiative, a
      multi-year redesign of the European air traffic network by 2020, to
      eventually handle 20 million flights with fuel savings of &#8364;6 billion per
      year. During the census period, the framework enabled key decisions on
      traffic synchronisation to be implemented, which facilitated a substantial
      increase in air traffic control efficiency, and increased air space
      capacity by 20%. The benefits of the research to the client organisation
      was recognised by multiple nominations for INFORMS awards.
    
UnderpinningResearch

    Professor Bert De Reyck's research on project management, project
      portfolio management, R&amp;D project valuation and multi-criteria
      decision making allows organisations to value on-going and future projects
      using multiple objectives and criteria, while reconciling different
      stakeholders. The research relies on mathematical modelling, using
      management science/operational research techniques such as large-scale
      mathematical programming, decision analysis, and principal-agent
      modelling. The underpinning research includes work on valuing options and
      flexibility in R&amp;D projects using decision analysis [c], planning
      R&amp;D activities when there is a risk of technical failure [d], project
      valuation when stakeholders are risk averse [e], and project selection
      with multiple stakeholders having different objectives [a]. The research
      has been applied to various organisations in R&amp;D-intensive industries
      such as pharmaceuticals, energy, and aerospace [a] [b] [d].
    This case study focuses on the impact the research had on the European
      Commission's Single European Sky initiative. Europe's air traffic network
      is extremely congested and inefficient, due to the air traffic management
      system being fragmented and based around national practices. In order to
      handle the future increase in traffic, while maintaining safety and
      reducing the environmental impact, all European aviation players must
      cooperate to develop a modernised and unified system, which can be
      achieved by gradually introducing technological improvements to the
      system. These stakeholders, however, disagree not only on the benefit any
      proposed improvements would bring, but also on what the main objectives
      should be from these system enhancements.
    In this context, Professor De Reyck developed a novel decision-making
      framework for Eurocontrol, the European Air Traffic Management
      organisation, for supporting the evaluation of interdependent system
      improvements by the multiple stakeholders, while accounting for various
      objectives [a] [b]. The main issue was to find a way to help the different
      stakeholders trade off various objectives, while taking account of the
      lack of data available, the need to go quickly and the issues involved in
      a multi-cultural and multi-discipline programme. The framework allows for
      both qualitative and quantitative expert assessments, trading-off
      objectives such as capacity, safety, security, environment, predictability
      and efficiency. It also identifies commonalities and differences in the
      stakeholders' perspectives and recommends a preferred course of action,
      ultimately allowing Eurocontrol to create a single unified European sky by
      2020.
    The underpinning research was undertaken by Professor De Reyck, professor
      at UCL's Department of Management Science &amp; Innovation since 2007, in
      collaboration with Yael Grushka- Cockayne, a former PhD student of
      Professor Bert De Reyck, currently at the Darden School of Business
      (University of Virginia), and Professor Zeger Degraeve (Melbourne Business
      School). Professor De Reyck was the principal investigator.
    