CaseStudyId: 39750
Title: 
    Contextualising Greek poetry and its performance
    

ImpactDetails

    The department's collective and collaborative research in Greek
      performance culture and its continuity into the modern era feeds directly
      into its design and delivery of a wide-ranging programme of community
      activities. These are intended to engage the public with
      socio-political issues arising from our research, enrich the cultural
        life of London, and enhance tourist and visitor experience of the
      Capital. They are exemplified by the longstanding annual production of a
      Greek play at the UCL Bloomsbury Theatre and one-off events such as those
      surrounding the London Olympics in 2012. We have energetically seized the
      opportunities presented by new technologies to extend the reach of
      the impacts on public awareness of and engagement with such issues.
      Digitising and sharing the outcomes of these events has allowed the
      department to extend the range of its impacts to include the development
      and provision of reusable information and learning resources for
      independent study and for use in secondary schools and in courses at HEIs
      in the UK and beyond and to enhance the accessibility of its research to a
      wider public audience.
    The Greek Play
    The UCL Greek play has run for over 25 years. It functions as an
      important medium for increasing public understanding of research on Greek
      poetry and performance and its applications to contemporary performance.
      Since 2008 we have staged: Aeschylus' Agamemnon 2008;
      Aristophanes' Frogs 2009; Aeschylus' Libation Bearers and
      Eumenides 2010; Aristophanes' Lysistrata 2011; Euripides' Hippolytus
      2012; Euripides' Trojan Women February 2013 (see [2] in section
      5). Although the play is produced by students, staff researching Greek
      drama oversee its choice of play and translation and advise on
      interpretation and stagecraft, ensuring that current research is embedded
      into the performance and in programme notes contributed by them. The
      innovative and engaging results of their contributions can be seen, for
      instance, in the (2013) location of Trojan Women (overseen by Rosa
      And&#250;jar) in a modern war zone, whose setting paralleled the fluid relation
      between Euripides' production, heroic myth and events of the Peloponnesian
      War (see Carey [c]), and in the acclaimed Oresteia productions.
      Emmanuela Bakola used her groundbreaking UCL research in Greek literature
      and the environment [b] to underpin a production combining themes
      uncovered by her work (the house, the earth, the economics of peace and
      war, material waste). These were reflected in the play's publicity poster
      (the perverted circle of nature and the chthonic associations of the
      snake, a recurrent image in the trilogy), acting (contact with the soil in
      Agamemnon and Libation Bearers), costume (the Erinyes as
      vampires), props and space [2]. The end result was a holistic sense of a
      play rooted in its political, religious, theatrical-spatial and literary
      milieu. All of this was underpinned and supplemented by research-based
      programme notes.
    The plays are accompanied by talks for general audiences by
      (especially UCL) academics, and workshops with theatre practitioners, with
      generous funding initially from the Hellenic Society and the Classical
      Association, and now supported by an earmarked award from the Leventis
      Foundation. The talks and workshops explore issues of performance and the
      relevance and meaning of ancient drama in the modern world. The reach
      is demonstrated by the large audiences that the performances themselves
      (1935 for Trojan Women 2013, 1879 for Hippolytus 2012) and
      the accompanying lectures and workshops attract (308 at 2013 lectures, 60
      at workshops &#8212; see [2] below). Participants in these events include
      members of the public and school groups (students of English, modern
      languages, theatre studies or drama as well as Greek or Classical
      Civilisation) from many parts of the UK. The significance of this
      impact is demonstrated by the positive critical reviews [1] which the
      productions have received (`the UCL Classical Drama Society's production
      [of Hyppolytus was] explosive' - Matthew Parris, Times
      16/02/12, `superior to quite a few more lauded professional productions' -
      Tony Keen on our 2008 Agamemnon). Extensive audience feedback
      attests to the ways in which research-led performance and outreach both
      (re)shapes perception and enriches education. Sample comments from the
      public have included:
    `showed that however much times have changed over the last couple of
      thousand years, the suffering and cruelty of war continues';
    `made sense of the conventions of Greek tragedy';
    `excellent lecture; accessible and thought provoking; good experience for
      my daughter of being in a "uni lecture"`;
    `provided such a detailed insight into the major themes and characters,
      and the impact this would have had on the society the play was first
      performed to';
    (and from teachers specifically):
    `challenged them [visiting students] to revisit the play and their
      existing interpretations';
    `very pleased that the lecture did not just deal with the text, but
      extended the students' knowledge by looking at the role of women and
      mourning'. ([2] below)
    The play website [2] supplements these educational benefits by providing
      research-driven interviews, images and clips, a blog, programme notes,
      essays on the plays, suggestions for further reading and study questions.
      Through these media, we extend the impact of the event beyond those
      watching the performance itself via an educational resource available to
      everyone, allowing wider audiences (inter)nationally to engage with Greek
      plays as living theatre. This reach is extended further by related
      (digitised) events such as Miriam Leonard's inaugural (Tragedy and
        Modernity [3]), broadcast in Australia.
    London Olympics 2012
    A rare opportunity to improve public understanding of Greek poetry and
      performance arose thanks to the London Olympics 2012. On the basis of our
      longstanding research on athletics and celebration (current: Ag&#243;cs, Carey,
      past: Instone, Hornblower, Maehler) we took the lead in creating a
      consortium of London cultural and educational bodies (also including the
      British Museum, Institute of Classical Studies, Sir John Soane's Museum,
      Egypt Exploration Society, British Academy, Petrie Museum, Hellenic and
      Roman societies, Open University, Kings College London) to create a major
      programme of activities and exhibitions around the London Olympics 2012 on
      the theme of sport and competition in the ancient world and in its modern
      receptions and renewals. As well as co-ordinating events in the capital,
      we used the Roman Society website [4] as a portal for research-based
      Olympic themed activities throughout Britain to showcase Classics research
      nationally. The reach of this impact is demonstrated by the many
      and varied audiences around the country who benefited from engagement
      (either through live events or resultant video uploads), from the research
      outputs generated, and from the new partnerships formed.
    The programme, which ran from May to September 2012, featured three
      conferences, public lectures, panel discussions (with audiences of
      100-350), exhibitions, guided tours and hands-on activities in museums. It
      offered a fuller understanding of the different ways in which competition
      (especially but not exclusively athletic) was perceived, enacted and
      memorialised in the ancient world and in the modern era, providing a foil
      against which to assess contemporary competitions and help them understand
      the relevance of the ancient traditions in all areas of culture.
    As with the Greek plays, the reach and significance of the impacts of
      live events were increased through the creation of digital learning and
      information resources. Thus this impact was further enhanced by the Unit's
      Ancient Olympics website [6], which is now a permanent research-based
      educational resource offering summaries of key issues, related ancient
      texts and artefacts, recordings of talks, essays and images on the issues
      discussed, as well as suggestions for further reading and study questions.
      The reach of this resource is indicated by the fact that it has
      been viewed some 1200 times during the impact assessment period; its significance
      as an educational resource is suggested by user comments such as `I plan
      to use it with my GCSE group', and `a superb resource' [6]. It is now
      being further developed in collaboration with schoolteachers and pupils.
      The educational and public information impacts of the events were enhanced
      and extended still further by the publication of a full set of the public
      lectures on the website of the Society for the Promotion of Hellenic
      Studies, where they were viewed c. 2200 times during the impact assessment
      period [5].
    Chris Carey also gave invited public lectures on the sociology and
      ethnicity of athletics and the nature of ancient competition to audiences
      of 50-300 at associated events in Exeter, Nottingham, Dublin and London
      and at a follow-up seminar on law and sport in October 2013 for a legal
      and public audience at the Institute of Directors in London, organised by
      the Middle Temple. He was invited to provide a voiceover for an internet
      film (which included Olympic athletes) by the Guardian newspaper
      ([9]; blog comment: `very professional; impressive...'). He was also
      invited to produce a blog post for Cambridge Press, which had 6,225 unique
      visits (11,050 total visits) by late October 2013, making it the 3rd
      most popular blog post on the Cambridge Journals blog, of 260 posts across
      all disciplines; the only posts with more visits were promotional posts
      [7]. Carey also took part in a public discussion on sport at UCL with
      celebrated neuroscientist Semir Zeki for an audience of 150. A video of
      that discussion is now available online [8] and had received 900 views by
      October 2013.
    
ImpactSummary

    Research at UCL has underpinned two significant activities which bring
      our work to students, non-traditional learners and the wider world: the
      UCL Greek play and the programme of events surrounding the London
      Olympics. These exemplify the profound public impact of our research in
      Greek performed poetry in its social context. Each year, almost 2,000
      people attend the Greek play, along with workshops and lectures about
      staging, interpretation, and the play's relationship to its social and
      historical context. The research also informed the development of a
      collaborative programme of cultural events celebrating the 2012 Olympics,
      with emphasis on the festival's ancient roots. Open lectures, workshops,
      debates, interviews and exhibitions were supplemented by websites, which
      increased the range of our educational and public information impacts by
      sharing research-led activities with thousands more people.
    
UnderpinningResearch

    UCL Greek &amp; Latin has a long-established research expertise in Greek
      performance culture, with particular emphasis on performed text as a
      response to social-historical contexts and as medium for articulating,
      exploring or challenging the collective value system, as well as in the
      subsequent receptions and continuities of that performance culture. Our
      research interests coalesce around theatre and athletic
      success/celebration. Staff (past and present) who have published key items
      in this area include: Peter Ag&#243;cs (at UCL 2012-2013), Rosa And&#250;jar
      (2012-2013), Emmanuela Bakola (2007-2012), Chris Carey (2003-2013), Pat
      Easterling (1987-1994), Simon Hornblower (1997-2010), Stephen Instone
      (1993-2009), Miriam Leonard (2007-2013), Herwig Maehler (1993-2013),
      Malcolm Willcock (1993-2006).
    As well as providing vital infrastructure for teaching at secondary and
      tertiary levels nationally and internationally through texts and
      commentaries (Willcock, Maehler, Instone, Easterling, Carey), our research
      has explored the genesis, evolution and demise of genres, their
      socio-political context and its impact, the emergence, transmission and
      analysis of written texts, and the political and cultural drivers which
      shape the processes, nature, pragmatics and dramatics of (re)performance.
      This research has particularly illuminated: the dynamics shaping texts and
      genre; the ways in which performed poetry (especially lyric and drama)
      engages both with the past and with contemporary politics, religion and
      values, whether to explore, affirm or contest them; and the ways in which
      new cultural contexts and technologies create space for new readings and
      effects. The underpinning research base has been strengthened over the
      last seven years by the powerful presence in the department of colleagues
      researching the processes and theories of classical reception (And&#250;jar,
      Leonard, Wyke). Their work has helped cement the diachronic sense of
      impact on and in social, political and intellectual context(s) across time
      and cultures.
    Bakola's research at UCL has expanded our knowledge of fifth century
      Athenian comedy as competition, politics, intertext and performance and
      has been part of a major development (in which this department has played
      a significant role) which uses lost texts and authors to reconstitute the
      world of ancient theatre. She has shown the ways in which ideas of wealth
      are linked in comedy and tragedy to the dynamics of social and political
      change and to larger/deeper (still live) issues of environment and man's
      place in it [see b in section 3]. Carey has explored the complex fictive
      world (especially in its political dimension) created by tragedy in the
      imaginative and performative space between early Greek heroic epic and the
      theatre of fifth century Athens [c], and the new use to which the athletic
      victory song, originally destined for the elite of the Greek world, was
      put in the performative context of the dramatic festivals of democratic
      Athens [d]. The latter was included in a volume edited at UCL by Ag&#243;cs and
      Carey with Richard Rawles, which traced the re-use of the victory ode in
      contexts from fifth century Greece through Augustan Rome to Greek
      independence and twentieth century Europe and America. Ag&#243;cs [a] examines
      how the Pindaric victory ode fictionalises its own performance as
      convivial procession (komos) within the fluid semantics of the term
      and the larger cultural dynamics of performance modes. Hornblower's
      collection explores poetry and the games from a multi-disciplinary angle
      [g], including in a chapter by Carey on the logistics of performance.
      Leonard's research has mapped the formative impact of Athens in modern
      Europe from the enlightenment to the late twentieth century and forms the
      background for her exploration [e, f] of the complex continuing relation
      between Greek tragedy and ideas of the tragic and philosophy and
      psychoanalysis, which formed the basis of her inaugural lecture [3,
      section 5].
    