CaseStudyId: 39855
Title: 
    Supporting policy-making on sustainable urban transport
    

ImpactDetails

    Transport CO2 emissions have risen in all city contexts and
      there has been a strong imperative to examine how these can be reduced and
      to develop strategies to tackle the problem. Efforts to mitigate the
      impacts of climate change rely heavily on a changed approach in the
      transport sector (typically 20-40% of CO2 emissions at the city
      level). The research described above has led directly and indirectly to
      significant changes in policy determining how the transport sector
      responds to the challenge of climate change, in multiple jurisdictions in
      the UK and internationally.
    (i) Informing changes in UK city-wide, regional and national policy
        and investment:
    Prior to 2006 there was little, if any, consideration of climate change
      in UK transport planning. Since then, the need to reduce transport CO2
      emissions has featured prominently in all strategy development, usually as
      one of the primary objectives for the strategy. This major shift in
      emphasis has been informed, in part, by findings from the VIBAT studies,
      which were the first to consider this issue at the national level. Those
      findings have been disseminated at a huge range of seminars, conferences,
      workshops and publications, including over 50 presentations by Hickman [1].
      In 2006, Hickman and Banister held a lunchtime seminar on the VIBAT-UK
      study for transport experts at the UK Department for Transport (DfT).
      Written and oral submissions were also made to the Environmental Audit
      Select Committee (EAC) at the House of Commons, and the final EAC report
      cited the VIBAT work substantively, and requested that the DfT
      become more progressive on this topic. Since then, there have been
      significant changes in national, regional and city-based transport
      strategies, investment programmes, local masterplanning and urban planning
      strategies, at all scales of transport planning, and in multiple contexts.
      These have included much increased funding in public transport, walking
      and cycling (through dedicated transport funds in London and the Local
      Transport Plan mechanism in the UK); an increased use of urban planning as
      an instrument within transport planning; and revised street design
      approaches. In addition, a Local Sustainable Transport Fund of over &#163;100
      million has been provided by the DfT.
    The BSP research was carried out largely with city authorities, using a
      participatory approach that brought in local officers and politicians to
      help develop transport strategies and investment programmes over the long
      term (up to 2026 and beyond). Accordingly, it has fed into spatial and
      transport strategies and revised investment programmes devised by city and
      regional authorities. Notable examples since 2008 include the use of the
      research to inform the London's Mayoral Transport Strategy (Transport for
      London, or TfL, and GLA, 2009, 2011) [2, 3], which now includes
      reducing transport CO2 emissions as a major objective; and in
      Local Transport Plans and Delivering a Sustainable Transport System
      (DaSTS) studies for the Oxfordshire (2011) [4] and Swindon (2010)
      LTPs, where investment programmes have been developed to help reduce
      transport CO2 emissions. These will be implemented over the
      next 10-20 years and aim to significantly change travel behaviours and
      reduce CO2 transport emissions.
    The research has also facilitated a shift in policy approach at the
      national level towards low carbon transport, including a new emphasis on
      the need to consider alternative futures over the long-term. Thus, for
      example, the 2011 White Paper Cutting Carbon, Creating Growth: Making
      Sustainable Local Transport Happen by DfT [5] considers climate
      change as a major objective, takes a longer-term approach to strategy
      development over 20 years and includes consideration of the range of
      measures considered in the VIBAT studies.
    (ii) Emerging changes in travel behaviour:
    This improved awareness of the role of transport in reducing CO2
      emissions, and the changing strategy and investment programmes, has begun
      to translate into changes in transport funding patterns and, subsequently,
      in travel behaviour. More specifically, investment has been made in public
      transport, walking and cycling, and the use of urban planning to help
      support transport investments. This has been one of several important
      factors responsible for changes in travel behaviours, including less car
      usage and greater use of public transport, walking and cycling. Some
      studies of recent trends suggest that car usage is beginning to peak in
      certain urban areas in the UK (particularly London), and that public
      transport, walking and cycling are increasing in popularity (e.g. LeVine
      and Jones, On the Move, 2012). Although by no means the only
      factors, the changed policy and investment approach at the urban level &#8212;
      supported by the use of the VIBAT studies to demonstrate realistic
      investment policies for city authorities &#8212; has contributed to this.
    (iii) Influence on international policy:
    The VIBAT studies have similarly influenced strategy and policy
      development in international contexts. Research by Hickman et al [d]
      has had a particularly significant impact on the development of policy in
      Asia. Here, the sustainable urban transport concept, closely linked with
      the need to reduce transport CO2 emissions, is now the dominant
      policy approach and forms a central element of transport planning and
      major project investment by the Asian Development Bank. This has led to
      significant investment in public transport, walking and cycling, as
      alternatives to the private car, although of course there is a long way to
      go before sustainable travel behaviours are achieved internationally. The
      sustainable mobility approach is being further developed in related work
      by Hickman et al on multimodal interchange design in China (forthcoming in
      2014).
    (iv) Take-up of BSP methodologies in governmental and consultancy and
        academic work:
    Key methodologies developed through the VIBAT research include
      scenario analysis and backcasting; methods to quantify policy impacts and
      assess the likelihood of policy targets being met (such as the UK CO2
      emission reduction target and London Mayoral CO2 emission
      reduction target in London); simulation gaming and participatory scenario
      development. Since 2008, these approaches have been used in many other
      governmental, consultancy and academic studies (beyond the work of Hickman
      and Banister), including in work conducted by national and international
      policy-making organisations. The quantification of scenarios, for example,
      which was rarely used in the transport sector before the VIBAT-UK
      study, is now well used in almost all studies in mitigation in transport,
      providing a much clearer evidence base for policy makers. The UCL
      approaches have also been applied in the EU Logman and EU OPTIC projects,
      which applied very similar scenario development methodologies in to
      freight (rather than passenger) transport. Similarly, scenario analysis
      and backcasting (developed and applied in the transport sector in the VIBAT
      studies) have been used as part of the 2008-10 FP7 EU Freightvision
      project on long-term futures for freight transport in Europe [6].
    They have also been used at the UK governmental level, for example in
      publications seeking to quantify the impact of policy measures against
      targets. Important examples include the 2008 Delivering a Sustainable
        Transport Strategy and Carbon Pathways Analysis (both by
      DfT), and the 2009 documents on Low Carbon Transport: A Greener
        Future. A Carbon Reduction Strategy for Transport (DfT) and An
        Analysis of Urban Transport (Cabinet Office), the latter an
      important document feeding into the development of national transport
      strategy and funding levels for local authorities, including in Local
      Transport Plans [7]. All of these, in fact, used BSP approaches to
      quantify the likely impact of scenarios and strategies; BSP research also
      informed their new focus on reducing transport CO2 emissions
      and using urban planning to reduce car dependency.
    The approach have also underpinned UK consultancy studies, such as those
      by Halcrow/CH2M (jointly with the BSP) [8], WS Atkins, and Arup in
      the Guildford Transport Strategy, which made direct use of the VIBAT
      approaches in scenario development, visioning and scenario quantification.
      This has improved awareness of robust and practical approaches to reducing
      transport CO2 emissions. The BSP methods have also been used in
      international studies such as those by AEA Technology in the EU
        Transport GHG: Routes to 2050 Project (2010) and in various Asian
      Development Bank projects. These include their global regional modelling
      of low carbon transport pathways in the ASEAN region, considering policy
      approaches that can be taken in Indonesia, Malaysia, Philippines,
      Singapore, Cambodia and Thailand (2011-14); and studies on sustainable
      mobility and investments in sustainable transport projects [8].
    
ImpactSummary

    Research on sustainable transport conducted by Hickman et al at UCL has
      contributed significantly to a major shift in UK and international
      transport policy during the last decade. Whereas such policy previously
      included little, if any, consideration of climate change, the desire to
      reduce transport CO2 emissions is now often its primary
      objective. Findings from and methods developed through the research have
      been used at city, regional, national and international to support and
      implement revised strategies and investment programmes promoting
      sustainable transport. As such, they contributed to increased use of
      public transport, walking and cycling, and reduced dependence on car
      usage. The methods have also been widely used by international
      consultancies and other researchers.
    
UnderpinningResearch

    The Bartlett School of Planning (BSP) has a long history of research in
      transport planning, typically as part of the planning of cities and urban
      areas. A key strand of this is work on sustainable transport led by Dr
      Robin Hickman (researcher/visiting lecturer at BSP from 2004, and Senior
      Lecturer since 2011), in association with Professor David Banister (who
      worked at UCL up to 2006, subsequently Oxford University), and in
      partnership with engineering, planning and urban design consultancies such
      as CH2M Hill/Halcrow and Space Syntax Ltd.
    Impacts on the development of sustainable urban transport systems are
      underpinned particularly by research from 2004 onwards involving the
      development and modification of approaches in scenario analysis and their
      application to sustainable transport strategy and investment programme
      development. This has included the development of innovative approaches in
      scenario development, visioning, backcasting, scenario quantification and
      modelling, multi-criteria appraisal (MCA) against scenarios, and
      participatory involvement in scenarios. Much of this was highly original
      research, developed to challenge the projected increase in transport CO2
      emissions and develop alternative policy and investment approaches.
      Simulation modelling/games (i.e. transport and carbon simulations and
      integrated transport and simulation decision support tools) were also
      designed to help take the decision-making process to a wider group of
      stakeholders, including politicians, civil society, the public, and
      technical specialists at the city authority level. These approaches were
      developed by Hickman, Banister and wider team members during work with the
      UK Department for Transport, Transport for London and other city
      authorities.
    Between 2004 and 2012, the UCL team developed both qualitative and
      quantitative scenario approaches allowing, for example, quantification of
      the likely impact of policy measures &#8212; both in combination and as
      synergetic strategies &#8212; over the long term (up to 2030 and 2050) and in
      participation with local stakeholders. These constituted novel and
      little-used approaches to transport planning. The work was conducted at
      the BSP by Hickman and Banister, the first for the UK Department for
      Transport's Horizons Programme (Visioning and Backcasting for
        Transport: VIBAT-UK, 2004-06) (Banister as principal investigator
      and Hickman as lead researcher). The key insight of this was the
      requirement for behavioural, as well as technological, responses to low
      transport CO2 emissions [a]. In other words, it
      identified a need for much greater use of walking, cycling, public
      transport and urban planning, as well as low emission vehicles, to
      significantly reduce transport CO2 emissions. The second major
      study (VIBAT-London, 2007-09) was carried out by Hickman (principal
      investigator) with Banister and others as part of the UrbanBuzz programme,
      led by UCL and developed in association with Halcrow, Space Syntax,
      Transport for London and the Greater London Authority. Here, the research
      focus was on the potential for low-carbon transport pathways to be
      developed and implemented in London, and the likelihood of meeting the
      Mayoral CO2 emission reduction target in transport. The study
      considered the range of policy measures available in London, modelled
      levels of application and investment, and explored strategies and
      strategic choices available to decision-makers. A simulation modelling
      game (TC-SIM) was developed to illustrate the strategic choices available
      and the trade-offs against CO2 reduction, political and
      financial deliverability. The research recommendations included: reducing
      average vehicle emissions to below 95 gCO2/km by 2025;
      increasing the use of biofuels to around 10% of the fleet; radically
      increasing the use of urban densities and mixed uses around public
      transport interchanges (including in suburban locations); increasing the
      geographical scope of the congestion charge across London (and charging
      against emissions); increasing levels of investment in public transport,
      walking and cycling; and considering international flying emissions in the
      Mayor of London's target [b].
    A series of related studies conducted since 2009 have allowed the UCL
      team to test the application of the strategy development work in both UK
      and international contexts. These have involved the development &#8212; and in
      many cases modelling &#8212; of wide-ranging and integrated strategies,
      including different levels of application of a range of policy measures
      such as those mentioned above. The studies have supported the development
      of context-specific low carbon transport strategies and pathways tailored
      to meet particular problems and opportunities. Specific applications have
      included the use of scenarios and multi-criteria appraisal in Oxfordshire
      (for Oxfordshire County Council) and Swindon (for Swindon Borough Council
      and the DfT). Here the research was used to provide an evidence base to
      help develop the Local Transport Plan. The work was also discussed with
      local stakeholders, politicians and the public [c].
    Elsewhere, the same research has been applied for Transport Canada in
      Victoria, in Auckland for the University of Auckland and Auckland Council,
      and also in an Asian context via projects in Delhi (for Asian Development
      Bank) and Jinan, China (University of Oxford, Future of Cities Programme)
      [d]. In each, a low-carbon transport strategy and investment
      programme was developed and policy measures suggested for investment by
      the city authority. Further simulation modelling games were developed for
      Swindon and Auckland, this time with MCA application against low CO2
      transport strategies. A major essay on urban transport and carbon emission
      reduction [e] encompasses much of the research project, including
      the development and application of scenario methodologies and the testing
      of these in London and Oxfordshire.
    