CaseStudyId: 39944
Title: 
    Peoples-based conservation: Caring for Hinemihi, the Maori meeting
        house at Clandon Park, UK
    

ImpactDetails

    This research programme has introduced new peoples-based approaches to UK
      heritage
      conservation and, in the process, has brought together and engaged new
      communities in both the
      UK and New Zealand with their cultural heritage. Its impacts on
      conservation practice and
      community engagement with cultural heritage can be seen particularly in
      the transition of the
      approach of the NT to the conservation of Hinemihi [3], and the current
      active role of Hinemihi's
      People in her care [4,5,6]. As well as benefiting participants, the work
      has enhanced conservation
      in the UK and internationally through its influence on theory, practice,
      and teaching [1,2].
    Benefiting Conservation Theory, Practice, and Teaching
    The Hinemihi project has led to new ways of understanding and teaching
      conservation, as well as
      to a reworking of practice within the discipline. Its influence on the
      developing conservation
      profession can be seen in the use of the peoples-based approach advocated
      by Sully based on his
      work in New Zealand within post-graduate teaching. That approach now
      features, for example, in
      the Institute of Conservation's (ICON) Sharing Conservation Decisions
      courses (2011-2013),
      which reach approximately 120 conservation practitioners and postgraduate
      students per year [1].
      Research that has led to the establishment of a new definition of
      conservation has been
      established within a wider view of heritage, that reflects the
      transmission of cultural practice in the
      care of cultural spaces and objects [2]. This has enabled heritage
      conservation to address the
      social issues of the present and engage the future, rather than merely
      seeking to fix the past. In so
      doing, it validates conservation responses that seek to incorporate the
      multiple ways that people
      care for and use their own cultural heritage. This has been developed
      through the work of
      ICCROM (International Centre for the Study of the Preservation and
      Restoration of Cultural
      Property) as a part of the Living Heritage Programme (2009-2011) and their
      developing research
      on People Centred Approaches [2] and, more broadly, acknowledged within
      the conservation
      discipline [1].
    Transforming the Conservation of Hinemihi
    The volunteer group Te Maru o Hinemihi (In the embrace of
      Hinemihi) was established in March
      2012 with Sully as a founder committee member [9]. The group represents
      the institutionalisation
      of an object centred network of people around Hinemihi to collaborate in
      her effective care with the
      National Trust, whose conservation approach to Hinemihi has been
      transformed during the years
      since the research began. In 2003, the meeting house was described on the
      NT website and
      Clandon Guidebook as "...the single most important [ethnographic] item
        held....the house
        commemorates the Governorship of New Zealand..." [10] The research
      itself and the subsequently
      increased participation of Maori in Hinemihi's care has catalysed a shift
      within the NT from a focus
      on the material authenticity of Hinemihi as a historic building towards a
      Maori view of Hinemihi as a
      living being and an active marae [3,4,6]. Today, the translation
      of Maori conservation approaches
      to Hinemihi is evident in the decisions taken and even the language used
      by the NT, for example in
      its description of the observance of Maori tikanga (philosophy) and
        kawa (protocol) [3,4,8].
    Community Cohesion and Involvement with Cultural Heritage: Engaging
        Hinemihi's People
    One of the project's many legacies is the vibrant and sustainable network
      of social relationships
      between communities &#8212; both New Zealand and British &#8212; and their cultural
      heritage There are
      believed to be around 8,000 Maori, and an additional 50,000 New Zealanders
      presently living in
      the UK. Since 2004, a community of Hinemihi's People has been built and
      engaged through
      regular participatory events such as annual Kaitiakitanga Hinemihi
      Maintenance Days, and
      community-building events such as the workshop series [4,6,7]. Between
      2008-2013 these events,
      which have involved over 400 participants and many encounters with
      National Trust visitors, have
      nurtured and developed relationships between Hinemihi and her people.
      `Hinemihi's People'
      encompasses both the role of Maori in Hinemihi's care, and that of British
      people in sustaining her
      future in ways based on lived experience. Accordingly, the research
      encourages and facilitates
      both the local community of Clandon and those of New Zealand origin to
      think of Hinemihi as an
      intrinsic and living part of their community. A project participant's
      comment demonstrates this view
      of Hinemihi almost as a family member: `We keep her warm when we visit
      her, we keep her from
      being lonely. I lived in New Zealand for 33 years and coming back here
      it's like home; my
      grandchildren were baptised here two years ago, the first babies to be
      baptised in this marae'
      (interviewee 2012) [7].
    An important aspect of this unique model of community engagement is that
      of engaging children
      with cultural heritage. The five `Being with Hinemihi' sessions run in
      2009 as part of the
      `whareNOW' workshop series led to the development in 2009 of a
      dance performance with the
      children's educational group, Kohanga Reo o Ranana, to share the
      significance and stories of
      Hinemihi and her People. As one young Kohanga Reo tamariki (child)
      participant explained during
      Being with Hinemihi: `I like Hinemihi because she is pretty. She makes me
      feel important because
      she is special and she's my ancestor' [7]. The Kohanga is intended to
      engage New Zealand
      children in the UK with Maori culture, to which the connection with
      Hinemihi is central. A
      performance, Ko au te whare (I am the house), was staged at
      several venues from 2009-2013,
      including at Hangi celebrations at Hinemihi and at cultural
      festivals and academic conferences in
      the UK, Raratonga, New Zealand, and Australia [7, p. 21]. Ko au te
        whare has now become an
      important learning resource used with children from diverse cultural
      backgrounds. In October 2012,
      for instance, 45 children from Clandon School participated in Ko au te
        whare, and similar events
      have been held for children from inner city London schools and as part of
      the `Origins: Heritage of
      First Nations "Border Crossings" in 2011 [7, p. 11].
    A second aspect is that of creating an essential means for Hinemihi's
      people to engage with their
      cultural heritage in a similar way to meeting houses in New Zealand. The
      "Sharing with Hinemihi"
      series (attended by 65 participants) culminated in "Staying with
      Hinemihi", a noho marae (sleep
      over) in August 2010. This also had important implications for the
      conservation project and the
      future use of Hinemihi. For the first time in 124 years, Hinemihi was kept
      awake with the sounds of
      43 of her people sleeping inside her. Staying with Hinemihi provided an
      important channel to foster
      the development of cultural heritage: one participant observed `I will
      always remember sleeping in
      Hinemihi and what a privilege that was. I loved singing and talking with
      her and helping her to be
      fed on a wairua (spiritual) level. As a Maori, I understand this
      important facet of caring for such a
      taonga. If people can stay in Hinemihi on a regular basis, she will
      be warm and fully fed all the
      time...' (interviewee 2012) [7].
    During the event itself, the group completed an artwork titled `Painting
      Hinemihi by numbers' to link
      the conservation work and paint analysis at UCL with a communal vision of
      Hinemihi's future
      appearance. The visual artist Cecilie Gravesen also produced an original
      piece entitled `Between
      Hinemihi and Other Things' as a response to her participation in these
      workshops [7, p. 20]. The
      tukutuku weaving workshops have likewise supported the production
      of new artwork, this time in
      the form of decorative panels produced using traditional crafting
      techniques. At the same time, the
      sessions also enhanced the capacity of Hinemihi's People to look after
      her. By June 2013, 36
      workshop participants had completed 16 of the 49 panels needed, and over
      50 weavers had
      contributed to the work. The remaining panels are being completed by Ngati
      Hinemihi in New
      Zealand and by Hinemihi's People in the UK [7, p. 15].
    The development of the Hinemihi marae also provides opportunities
      for visitors to Clandon (50,000
      in 2012) [10] to encounter Maori culture and consider the modern legacy of
      Britain's past colonial
      relationships. An illustration of this was the formal powhiri
      (ceremonial welcoming) of the New
      Zealand Olympic team at Hinemihi on 8 August 2012. Hinemihi's presence
      provided much needed
      tautoko (support) to inspire the New Zealand athletes [7]. This
      intercultural encounter is
      fundamental to the role of a marae, and is critical in a
      multicultural society seeking to understand
      what it is to be British [5].
    
ImpactSummary

    The Peoples-based Conservation Project (PBC) has challenged conventional
      heritage
      conservation practice by privileging a community's cultural systems over
      universalised concepts of
      heritage, through participatory practice. This transformed conservation
      practice by transferring the
      focus from material preservation to developing and preserving the
      connections between people,
      their cultural heritage, and each other. This new approach has developed a
      shared responsibility
      between the National Trust and Maori in the UK and New Zealand for the
      care of Hinemihi, an
      historic Maori meeting house which is no longer conserved as an object of
      built heritage, but as the
      living focus of a network of reciprocal social relationships.
    
UnderpinningResearch

    The Peoples-based Conservation Project (PBC), led by Dean Sully (Lecturer
      in Conservation since
      2000) at UCL, has instituted a new understanding of conservation practice
      by prioritising the
      relationships between people and objects as the essential element of
      heritage conservation [a]. In
      2002, Sully initiated research in partnership with the National Trust (NT)
      and Maori community
      groups to establish a strategic approach to long-term conservation
      management at Hinemihi, a
      historic Maori meeting house at Clandon Park, a National Trust property in
      Surrey. Maori meeting
      houses embody the values, customs, social structures and practices of
      Maori people. They are
      public places where important decisions were made, visitors entertained,
      genealogies affirmed,
      relationships confirmed, births and marriages celebrated, and the dead
      mourned. `Hinemihi' is
      characterised as female, and `she' is referred to as a living ancestor of
      the Ngati Hinemihi people
      [a,b].
    Before Sully's research began, the debate around Hinemihi's conservation
      had focused specifically
      on physical alterations to her built structure. In 2002, Sully devised a
      conservation strategy based
      on a values-based conservation management approach that advocated the
      active participation of
      UK and New Zealand-based Maori in the care of Hinemihi [a,b]. This
      strategy questioned the NT's
      conventional approach to Hinemihi as an `ethnographic object', and thus
      challenged the power
      relationships between project participants [a].
    In 2003 a fabric survey, condition assessment and archival survey
      undertaken by UCL [c] revealed
      evidence of substantial periodic changes in Hinemihi's physical and
      cultural fabric. This meant that
      she could not be conserved as an immutable representation of an historical
      period, but should be
      viewed, instead, as a structure in transition [a]. This insight provided
      the basis for a formal
      consultation process starting in 2004; Sully played a key role in this
      process in his capacity as a
      member of the Hinemihi Stakeholder Group and Hinemihi Project Steering
      Group (2004-10).
    During fieldwork in New Zealand in 2004 and 2010, Sully studied New
      Zealand's conservation
      approach to historic meeting houses as developed by Pouhere Taonga
      (New Zealand Historic
      Places Trust, NZHPT) [a,d]. In Pouhere Taonga's approach, the
      restoration of a meeting house
      was seen as a catalyst to building capacity among local people and as a
      vehicle for the transfer of
      knowledge and cultural practice. Sully translated this approach to &#8212; and
      thereby instituted new
      conservation practices in &#8212; the UK by applying decolonising methods such
      as Maori kaupapa (the
      philosophy and practice of being Maori). The application of these methods
      at Hinemihi refocused
      conservation practice on building relationships between people and their
      heritage objects, in line
      with the approach that Sully had observed in New Zealand [a,d]. A volume
      on these approaches,
      with contributions from the main participants in the PBC project, was
      published in 2007 [a].
      Subsequent work established systems in which research questions and
      methods are generated in
      partnership with communities, and which reflect the aspirations of those
      participants in the specific
      circumstances of the conservation project [c,d].
    As an early response to views expressed in the conservation consultation,
      in 2004 Sully initiated
      the annual `Kaitiakitanga: Maintenance of Hinemihi Days' [d]. These
      reflect the Maori concept of
      reciprocal care of taonga (treasures), according to which
      principle, by caring for Hinemihi (keeping
      her warm through songs, speech, and touch during cleaning, repair and
      maintenance), Hinemihi's
      People are themselves cared for. These events provided a forum for
      discussion about the use and
      care of Hinemihi and have enabled a continuing connection between the
      project and `Hinemihi's
      People', a group formed by Sully as a sustainable conservation community
      that reflects the
      contemporary reality of this heritage project. This community consists of
      a diverse network of Maori
      and non-Maori people and groups, including the descendants of the
      originating community in New
      Zealand; National Trust staff, volunteers, members and visitors; artists
      and craftspeople; local
      residents; and 14 Maori and Polynesian cultural groups based in New
      Zealand and the UK [c,d].
    Between 2009 and 2013, three series of community-based capacity building
      events were
      organised under the banner of `whareNOW'. These events, which
      enabled the development of
      relationships between Hinemihi and her people to be investigated and
      documented, were designed
      by Sully with community partners including parents and teachers from the
      London Maori preschool;
      British-based members of the Maori &amp; Polynesian Community; members of
      the NT; residents local
      to Clandon; and UCL staff and students. The first workshop series, `Being
      with Hinemihi', included
      five activity sessions in 2009, which explored the relationship between UK
      Maori families and
      Hinemihi. The 2010 `Sharing with Hinemihi' series involved six learning
      events at Hinemihi and
      UCL that considered how Maori and others feel when they are with Hinemihi.
      Finally, in a 2012-13
      series of three 3-day Tukutuku weaving workshops, Ngati Hinemihi
      weavers taught participants
      Maori weaving skills in order to produce tukutuku panels
      (decorative internal woven wall panels)
      that will be incorporated into the restored Hinemihi [d].
    