CaseStudyId: 40406
Title: 
    Study A leads to changes in Tuberculosis treatment guidelines
    

ImpactDetails

    TB is a major health problem, with 9.4 million new cases and 1.7 million
      deaths in 2009 [a]. WHO guidelines issued in 2003 [b]
      recommended a regimen of daily ethambutol, isoniazid, rifampicin and
      pyrazinamide for 2 months, followed by ethambutol and isoniazid for 6
      months (2EHRZ/6HE) as one of the category 1 regimens for the treatment of
      drug sensitive M Tuberculosis. However, that regimen had not been
      evaluated in a randomised controlled trial. Study A found that this
      regimen was clearly inferior to a regimen with the same 2-month intensive
      phase, followed by 4 months of isoniazid and rifampicin.
    The results of Study A were published in 2004. It took several years for
      the results of the research to change international guidelines, perhaps
      partly because the results were disappointing to international agencies,
      who would have preferred not to use rifampicin after the initial intensive
      phase of treatment because of the risk of acquired resistance to this drug
      in patients who failed treatment. However, eventually the results did
      begin to influence international policy, as they provided evidence that
      filled an important gap in knowledge of how to treat TB.
    In 2006 the International Standards for Tuberculosis Care cited the Study
      A results [c], and recommended 2EHRZ/4HR as the preferred
      treatment regimen, but that 2EHRZ/6HE could be used where adherence
      through the continuation phase cannot be assessed. It was considered to be
      of particular relevance for the developing world, where the majority of
      people with active TB live.
    Study A was included in an influential 2009 meta analysis, which said "The
        most important finding of this review is that all three treatment
        outcomes were significantly worse with regimens that used rifampin for
        the first 1-2 mo rather than throughout therapy. This finding adds
        considerable weight to similar findings by Jindani and colleagues, who
        compared regimens containing 2 mo versus 6 mo of rifampin" [d].
    Eventually, in 2010, the WHO guidelines were updated in a periodic review
      [e]. This involved carrying out a systematic review of the
      evidence, which included the results from Study A, which were graded as
      the most convincing of the available evidence. One of the principal
      investigators of the trial (Professor Andrew Nunn) was a member of the
      expert advisory group which helped to develop the new guidelines. The new
      WHO guidelines included the recommendation that "New patients with
        pulmonary TB should receive a regimen containing 6 months of rifampicin:
        2EHRZ/4HR". Indeed, the foreword states the importance of this
      change: "The World Health Organization's Stop TB Department has
        prepared this fourth edition of Treatment of tuberculosis: guidelines,
        adhering fully to the new WHO process for evidence-based guidelines.
        Several important recommendations are being promoted in this new
        edition.
    First, the recommendation to discontinue the regimen based on just 2
        months of rifampicin (2HRZE/6HE) and change to the regimen based on a
        full 6 months of rifampicin (2HRZE/4HR) will reduce the number of
        relapses and failures. This will alleviate patient suffering resulting
        from a second episode of tuberculosis (TB) and conserve patient and
        programme resources."
    WHO guidelines are very influential for national TB policy, particularly
      in African countries, which face a high burden of TB. A survey of national
      tuberculosis policymakers found that WHO was an important and frequent
      source of information to inform TB policymaking in Africa. This means that
      the WHO recommendation, based on Study A, has influenced which TB
      treatment regimens are used in many countries. National guidelines for TB
      have been updated to refect the new treatment regimes including Ethiopia,
      South Africa, and Zimbabwe [f]. Routine data collected by WHO
      shows that in 2011, 196 out of 206 countries reported using the 6 month
      regimen with rifampicin throughout for new TB patients. The number of new
      TB cases (excluding multi-drug resistant TB) in these 196 countries
      totalled 7,883,245 in 2011, so the results of Study A have had a
      wide-reaching impact (although it should be noted that not all of these
      countries were previously using the 8 month regimen) [g].
    From the perspective of these eight million patients, the 2EHRZ/4HR has
      several benefits over the previous 8-month regimen. As well as reducing
      the number of people who have unfavourable outcomes and require
      retreatment, it also reduces the inconvenience of attending for treatment
      (whether fully supervised or not) and reduced the time in which they were
      exposed to toxic drugs.
    National Ministries of Health have benefited from the research, as the
      2EHRZ/4HR patient kit is US$ 4-10 less expensive than the 2EHRZ/6HE
      patient kit [d]. Reducing the number of people requiring
      retreatment also reduces costs. This allows more people to be treated with
      the available (limited) resources.
    It is difficult to determine the exact impact Study A's finding have had
      in reducing unfavourable outcomes. However if we assume that the reduction
      of relapses and treatment failures is the same in real life as in the
      trial, and that around 7.9 million people were treated with the 2EHRZ/4HR
      regimen in 2011, then the impact of Study A in that year alone was to
      prevent over 400,000 relapses and failures, compared to if those people
      had been treated with the eight month regimen. However, the actual number
      of relapses prevented directly due to Study A is likely to be lower than
      this, as not all countries were previously using the 8 month regimen, and
      some of those countries that did change may have done so for other
      reasons.
    
ImpactSummary

    Prior to the change in WHO recommendations which occurred following this
      study many patients in Africa and other developing countries were
      receiving an inferior regimen for the management of tuberculosis, a
      consequence of which meant that many had to be retreated. Since the
      implementation of the revised WHO Guidelines in 2010 almost all countries
      have now switched to the gold standard tuberculosis treatment regimen
      based on 6 months of isoniazid and rifampicin
    
UnderpinningResearch

    Study A was a multi-centre randomised controlled trial testing two
      8-month regimens (one of which was recommended in international guidelines
      at the time) against the gold standard 6-month regimen for treatment of
      newly diagnosed pulmonary tuberculosis. The trial was sponsored by the
      International Union Against Tuberculosis and Lung Disease (IUATLD) and
      involved 1,355 patients from eight centres in Africa and Asia. This was
      the first TB trial to utilise a non-inferiority trial design.
    From 1993 onwards WHO recommended an 8-month regimen without rifampicin
      in the maintenance phase, in preference to a 6-month regimen with
      rifampicin throughout. WHO guidelines (issued in 2003) recommended a
      regimen of daily ethambutol, isoniazid, rifampicin and pyrazinamide for 2
      months, followed by ethambutol and isoniazid for 6 months (2EHRZ/6HE).
      However, that regimen had not been evaluated in a randomised controlled
      trial. Study A compared that regimen with a 6-month regimen with the same
      initial intensive phase as the first regimen, followed by four months of
      daily rifampicin and isoniazid (2EHRZ/4HR).
    Study A demonstrated that the WHO-recommended 2EHRZ/6HE regimen was
      clearly inferior to the 2EHRZ/4HR regimen [1]. 12 months after the
      end of chemotherapy 10.4% treated with 2EHRZ/6HE had unfavourable
      outcomes, compared to only 4.9% of those treated with 2EHRZ/4HR. At 30
      months the failure/relapse rates were 11.7% of those treated with
      2EHRZ/6HE and 6.0% of those treated with 2EHRZ/4HR [2]. The study
      was carried out between March 1998 and June 2004 and the results 12 months
      after stopping treatment were presented at the IUATLD meeting in Montreal
      in October 2002, and were published in 2004 [1]; the 30 month
      follow-up results were published in 2011 [2].
    Key researchers and the positions they held at the time of the
        research
    The International Union Against Tuberculosis and Lung Disease is a long
      established NGO working to support national tuberculosis programmes
      world-wide. Its mission is to bring innovation, expertise, solutions and
      support to address health challenges in low- and middle-income
      populations. The IUATLD conceived the trial and invited Andrew Nunn at the
      MRC Clinical Trials Unit (MRC CTU) to be an investigator because of his
      long-standing involvement in TB clinical trials, as he had been
      statistician for previous practice-changing trials. The MRC CTU took the
      lead in statistics, in the non-inferiority design of the study, in the
      interim analyses for the Data Monitoring Committee and analyses for the
      published findings. Andrew Nunn was also closely involved in the writing
      of the papers for publication. IUALTD chose to work with MRC CTU because
      of the Unit's expertise in trial design and statistical analysis.
    Dr Amina Jindani and Professor Donald Enarson were both employed by the
      IUATLD, Professor Enarson as the Scientific director, Dr Jindani was the
      chief investigator on the study; Professor Andrew Nunn who was at that
      time Head of Division Without Portfolio, MRC Clinical Trials Unit, was the
      senior statistician.
    