CaseStudyId: 40405
Title: 
    Health Survey for England informs public policy on obesity
    

ImpactDetails

    Worldwide, obesity represents one of the most challenging health
      problems, with the UK having among the highest rates in Europe. The
      associations between obesity and health problems such as type 2 diabetes
      are set to add substantially to health service costs in the future.
    Measurements taken as part of the Health Survey for England (HSE) have
      been used extensively at every stage of obesity policy making and
      monitoring. Public Health England describes HSE as "currently the most
        robust data source to monitor trends in adult obesity in England" [a].
      HSE data are used extensively by the Department of Health, NHS and local
      authority staff, the media, and the public. In one year alone (1 April
      2012-1 April 2013) there were 36,803 page views (26,928 unique) of HSE
      pages on the Health and Social Care Information Centre (HSCIC)'s website.
      The three months April-June 2013 saw 7,796 downloads [b]. The UK
      Data Service reported that the HSE was the second most frequently
      downloaded dataset in the UK in 2011 [c]. Here we present key
      evidence for how, during the period 2008-13, HSE has informed the
      quantification of the obesity problem, the development of Government
      policy and strategy, the development of clinical guidelines, and the
      monitoring of progress.
    Measuring the obesity problem
    HSE data have enabled the extent and escalation of obesity within the
      population to be quantified, drawing the attention of Government and
      policymakers to the issue. Importantly, HSE data enabled the
      quantification of the obesity problem within sub-groups of the population,
      highlighting the high rates in children and among adults from lower
      socioeconomic positions. The Foresight Report, funded by the Government
      Office for Science, used HSE 1994-2004 data to project population trends
      to 2050 and examine future impacts on life expectancy and economic costs
      of overweight and obesity [d]. The 2010 adult update [e]
      used HSE data from 1993 to 2007. The adult obesity projections varied
      little: future health problems were predicted to soar, with
      obesity-related diabetes rising by 98%, strokes by 23%, and heart disease
      by 44% by 2050.
    Influencing Government policy and strategy
    HSE measurement data are used by Government to produce evidence-based
      strategies to combat obesity. The Chief Medical Officer (CMO), the
      Government's most senior medical advisor, publishes an annual report to
      identify priorities in health and recommend action to improve public
      health. The CMO's 2011 report used a range of HSE data, including on
      obesity [f]. The UCL team were responsible for the analyses which
      identified obesity as one of the main risk factors behind the differences
      in prevalence of multiple lifestyle risk factors by age and by
      socio-economic position.
    The research on the HSE that was cited in the Foresight report was used
      to justify investment of money and Government focus on obesity. For
      example, in the 2008 Healthy Weight, Healthy Lives: A Cross-Government
        Strategy for England, a range of commitments for reducing obesity
      were identified [g]. It states: "the Government will make
        available an additional &#163;372 million for promoting the achievement and
        maintenance of healthy weight over the period 2008-11." The 2011
      document Healthy Lives, Healthy People: A call to action on obesity in
        England set out specific plans for dealing with the obesity problem
      [h]. One specific area in which our data influenced this report was
      in relation to the Change4Life campaign, an extensive public
      health programme run by the Department of Health which started in 2009.
      HSE data were used to choose the appropriate adult age group to target for
      a new phase of the health promotion campaign entitled Change4Life: One
        Year On [i]. In addition, a calorie reduction target set out
      in this document was derived from HSE weight gain data, to estimate that a
      mean reduction in daily energy intake of 100 calories (kcal) per person
      would correct the energy imbalance nationally. This was also set out
      within in Responsibility Deal &#8212; a series of pledges that food
      manufacturers, retailers, caterers, suppliers and service organisations
      such as restaurants signed up to with the goal of providing "a mechanism
      for the food and drink industry to make and record its contribution to
      helping the population meet the calorie reduction challenge" [j].
    Informing clinical guidance
    The National Institute of Health and Care Excellence (NICE) clinical
      guidelines on the prevention, identification, assessment and management of
      overweight and obesity in adults and children, currently being reviewed
      and updated, used HSE data to justify the document's creation, quantifying
      the issue of obesity, attaching economic costs to this, and assessing
      cost-effectiveness of clinical treatments. NICE 2012 guidance Obesity:
        working with local communities also used HSE obesity data to
      quantify the extent of the problem [k]. Mean measured height by
      age and sex from the Health Survey for England were used by the Standing
      Advisory Committee on Nutrition (SACN) in the SACN Dietary Recommendations
      for Energy to calculate energy requirements [l].
    Monitoring and evaluating the success of obesity strategies.
    HSE data have been used to monitor targets and evaluate the success of
      obesity strategies. HSE data showed early indications that the focus on
      childhood obesity was paying off, with wider evaluation shifting further
      strategy work to adults. One area of particular importance has been the
      monitoring of equality considerations. For example, equality impact
      assessments for the two Government reports Healthy Weight, Healthy
        Lives and Healthy Lives, Healthy People used HSE BMI data
      related to age, sex and ethnicity to show that the strategies met their
      legal requirements and could be implemented [m, n]. HSE is one of
      the Department of Health's main data sources for Parliamentary Questions
      on obesity (for example, PQ48492 in 2011) and Parliamentary debates (for
      example, House of Lords, 7 Jan 2010).
    
ImpactSummary

    UCL research, from the Department of Epidemiology &amp; Public Health,
      has underpinned the Health Survey for England's (HSE) role in informing
      obesity policy in England. HSE data quantified the extent and escalation
      of obesity within the population as a whole as well as specific
      sub-groups, resulting in this issue being given significant attention in
      government. HSE data has underpinned strategy development, the modelling
      of future scenarios, the identification of inequalities, and the creation
      of clinical guidance. HSE data has showed early indications that the focus
      on childhood obesity is paying off, with wider evaluation shifting further
      strategy work to adults. HSE data has also played a role in this area,
      defining the adult target group for the Change4Life programme.
      Furthermore, HSE data are underpinning new agreements with the food
      industry through the Responsibility Deal.
    
UnderpinningResearch

    The Health Survey for England (HSE) is an annual, cross-sectional health
      examination survey of the general population in England. It combines
      self-reported data (including demographic, socio-economic, health, and
      lifestyle data) with objective measures of health (such as measured
      height, weight, and waist circumference) [1]. It has been run by
      the Joint Health Surveys Unit of UCL and NatCen Social Research since
      1994; the 23rd survey is currently in the field. HSE provides
      data from nationally representative samples to monitor trends in the
      nation's health; identifies the prevalence of specified health conditions
      in the general population; measures the rates of certain risk factors and
      combinations of risk factors; examines differences between subgroups of
      the population; and monitors progress towards selected health targets. The
      UCL contribution to the HSE falls into three categories: providing the
      clinical and methodological expertise for the survey; jointly writing and
      editing the annual HSE reports; and leading the work on secondary data
      analysis and policy evaluation. The fieldwork and operational side of the
      HSE are conducted by NatCen, with UCL providing clinical oversight.
    UCL has developed internationally acclaimed expertise in survey
      methodology. For example, we have compared the effect of mode and context
      of survey on response rates, non-response bias, and responses; and of
      demographic and socio-economic variation in survey participants by time
      and day interviewed [2].
    HSE is one of the few health surveys in Europe to obtain objectively
      measured anthropometric data, rather than relying on self-reporting which
      consistently under-reports obesity. HSE provides objective, national,
      general population data on prevalence of general and abdominal obesity [3,
        4]. Extensive demographic and socio-economic data also permit
      assessment of inequalities in obesity by age, sex, geography, and several
      markers of socio-economic position.
    The HSE team at UCL have conducted a considerable amount of secondary
      analysis work using the HSE data. In 2009, for example, we used HSE data
      to analyse trends in obesity, and to make projections into the future [5].
      In 2011 we conducted the analyses and wrote the commentary for the section
      of the Chief Medical Officer's 2011 report on co-occurrence of multiple
      risk factors, which could be determined in the general population only
      through use of HSE data. We identified obesity as one of the main risk
      factors behind the differences in prevalence of multiple lifestyle risk
      factors by age and by socio-economic position, and for which the trend was
      upwards, unlike most other lifestyle risk factors [6]. Our 2012
      paper used HSE data to demonstrate that waist circumference (a marker for
      central/abdominal obesity) had increased in adolescents at a greater rate
      than generalised obesity (as shown by measuring BMI) [7].
    Since 2005, the UCL team has been led by Dr Jennifer Mindell in the
      Health and Social Surveys Research Group of the Research Department of
      Epidemiology &amp; Public Health, with substantial contributions from Dr
      Nicola Shelton and a number of post-doctoral and junior researchers.
    