CaseStudyId: 40401
Title: 
    Acid-sensing ion channels (ASICs), pain mechanisms and treatment
    

ImpactDetails

    i. New clinical studies with patient involvement
    By highlighting the importance of ASICs in pain regulation, we have
      increased the potential targets for research in patient populations across
      a range of conditions, and this is reflected by the recent increase in
      clinical studies focused on these channels. In the last three years, six
      clinical studies have been initiated to look at the involvement of ASICs
      in - and the effects of ASIC-targeted drugs on - conditions such as
      inflammatory pain, optic neuritis, and gastroesophageal reflux. These
      studies involve over 400 participants, including patients and healthy
      volunteers [a].
    ii. Novel drug and treatment development for pain and disease
    The world market for pain management drugs and devices reached $34.9
      billion in 2012, growing at a rate of 2.9% from 2010 to 2012. The market
      is growing as a result of the aging population, but also because of
      increased awareness of pain and the need for treatment, among other
      factors [b, c]. The major challenge in the pain drug market is to
      reduce the side-effects associated with treatment, and our discovery of
      roles for ASIC1b and ASIC4 in the pain caused by tissue acidosis - which
      accompanies a variety of conditions from arthritis to gastroesophageal
      reflux - has provided the pharmaceutical industry with ideal targets for
      the development of more specific analgesics which will have widespread
      applications.
    Our discovery that ASIC1b is only expressed in the peripheral nervous
      system, and has a sensory neuron-specific distribution and more selective
      ion permeability than other members of the ASIC family, makes it arguably
      the most promising of the ASIC targets for drug development. Indeed, more
      than 40 patents on treatments and compounds targeting ASIC1b are now held
      worldwide [d]. As well as analgesic compounds, these patents also
      cover ASIC-focused treatments of conditions such as ischaemic brain injury
      [e-1, e-2], epilepsy [e-3], and demyelinating diseases such
      as multiple sclerosis [e-4].
    iii. New ASIC-focused pharmaceutical company created
    Our research has shown that ASICs are important regulators of pain
      pathways, and these channels are thus valuable therapeutic targets. In
      2008, Sophia Antipolis established Theralpha, a dedicated ASIC-focused
      pharmaceutical company derived from the pioneering studies of Michel
      Lazdunski in France and the Wood group at UCL, focused on the development
      and commercialisation of innovative therapies for the treatment of pain.
      They are "advancing next generation pain drugs based on scientifically
      validated Acid Sensing Ion Channel (ASIC) pathways", and so far have
      developed compounds targeting ASIC1a, ASIC3 and ASIC1b (one of the
      channels we cloned). They describe their programme as follows [f]:
    "There has been a lack of clinical breakthroughs in recent years, and
        current therapies are often inadequate, have side effects, or are
        under-prescribed due to the dangers of addiction.
    Theralpha aims to develop its pipeline to address unmet medical need
        in pain, a significant economic burden where more than 300 million
        people worldwide suffer. The chronic pain market is currently valued at
        $30 billion and is forecast to reach more than $47 billion by 2023.
    Our lead product, THA903 is designed to address acute pain by
        sublingual administration. We have three additional product candidates
        in preclinical development [THA901, for the treatment of neuropathic and
        postoperative pain; THA902, for the treatment of inflammatory pain; and
        THA904, a natural peptide in drug discovery" which acts on the
      ASIC1b-containing channels that the Wood group at UCL discovered [g].
    By informing the development of novel pain-relieving compounds by a
      pharmaceutical company that specialises in ASIC-based therapies, our
      research has had commercial and economic impact on the pain drug market.
    iv. Sites of action of existing therapeutic and naturally-occurring
        compounds uncovered
    Our identification of a novel ASIC splice variant and a new member of the
      ASIC family has allowed mechanisms of action of existing compounds to be
      uncovered, thus increasing the clinical understanding and potential
      therapeutic application of commonly prescribed drugs (such as amiloride),
      and highlighting a therapeutic role for naturally-occurring analgesics
      (such as peptides in black mamba venom).
    Amiloride is a potassium-conserving diuretic, usually prescribed to treat
      water retention and hypertension. ASICs are sensitive to amiloride, and
      our lab showed that amiloride inhibits the current through ASIC1a and
      ASIC1b to a similar extent (see Underpinning Research section). In the
      light of amiloride's antagonistic effect on ASIC channels, this drug is
      increasingly being considered as an ASIC-based analgesic as well as a
      diuretic, and four clinical studies are now testing amiloride for the
      treatment of painful conditions such as pressure ulcers, heartburn, optic
      neuritis and human inflammatory pain [h].
    Recently, a new class of three-finger peptides from black mamba venom has
      been shown to abolish pain through inhibition of ASICs expressed either in
      central or peripheral neurons, including inhibition of peripheral ASICs
      containing the ASIC1b subunit that we cloned [g]. These peptides,
      termed mambalgins, are not toxic in mice but show a potent analgesic
      effect upon central and peripheral injection that can be as strong as
      morphine. Inhibition of ASIC1a and ASIC2a subunits in central neurons and
      of ASIC1b-containing channels in nociceptors is thought to be involved in
      the analgesic effect of mambalgins. Thus our cloning of ASIC1b has led to
      the identification of a mechanism (a key step for regulatory approval) by
      which natural peptides that block this target can produce a potent
      analgesia.
    
ImpactSummary

    As a result of our discoveries of a new splice variant (ASIC1b) and a new
      member (ASIC4) of the ASIC family, and elucidation of their roles in pain
      caused by tissue acidity, several pharmaceutical companies are now working
      on ASIC-targeted analgesics and one company has been set up specifically
      to focus on this work. ASIC-related therapies for a wide variety of
      conditions are now in clinical trials, with substantial patient
      involvement. Our work has allowed new therapeutic applications to be
      conceived for already existing prescribed compounds, and for
      naturally-occurring compounds, that act on ASICs. Thus, our research on
      ASICs has had clinical and commercial impact.
    
UnderpinningResearch

    Unrelieved pain associated with ischaemia, arthritis, gastroesophageal
      reflux, tissue inflammation and injury is a major unmet medical need. In
      these conditions and many others, the associated pain often results from
      tissue acidosis, which activates proton-gated ion channels. Proton-gated
      channels expressed by sensory neurons are of particular interest as
      primary sensors generating pain. A major set of proton-gated channels in
      mammals are the acid-sensing ion channels (ASICs). Low extracellular pH
      can activate pain pathways by evoking an inward current through these
      channels, which are expressed in both the central nervous system and in
      peripheral sensory neurons. We cloned a variety of sensory neuron-specific
      proteins including some new ASIC channels [1]. These new ASIC
      channels provide a novel potential transduction pathway from low pH to the
      sensation of pain. We have discovered and delineated the involvement of
      two new ASIC isoforms - ASIC1b and ASIC4 - in the pain resulting from
      tissue acidosis.
    In 1998, our lab cloned and characterised a new splice variant of
      acid-sensing ion channels named ASIC1b [2]. ASIC1b contains a
      unique N-terminal 172 amino acid region, as well as unique 5' and 3'
      untranslated sequences. ASIC1b, unlike ASIC1a, is found only in a subset
      of small and large diameter sensory neurons and is absent from sympathetic
      neurons or the central nervous system. Thus, the patterns of expression of
      ASIC1a and ASIC1b transcripts in rat dorsal root ganglion are distinct.
      When expressed in COS-7 cells, ASIC1b forms a functional channel with
      electrophysiological properties distinct from ASIC1a and ASIC3. The pH
      dependence and sensitivity to amiloride of ASIC1b is similar to that
      described for ASIC1a but, unlike ASIC1a, the channel is not permeable to
      calcium and ASIC1b-mediated currents are not inhibited by extracellular
      calcium. The unique distribution and properties of ASIC1b suggest that it
      may play a specialised role in sensory neuron function.
    In 2000, we identified a further member of this ion channel family,
      ASIC4, which is developmentally regulated and expressed in a subset of
      sensory neurons, as well as in the CNS [3]. However, despite the
      strong homology with other ASICs, the ASIC4 transcript does not encode a
      proton- gated cation channel. Over the past several years, it has become
      apparent that ASICs, including ASIC4, are important regulators of pain
      pathways, either in primary transduction mechanisms or via other
      mechanisms [4].
    