CaseStudyId: 40408
Title: 
    Improving the quality of care of people with and at risk of
      cardiovascular
      diseases
    

ImpactDetails

    The research of Hemingway's group has directly informed national and
      international public health
      policy, clinical guidelines and the development of underpinning methods
      which have subsequently
      been implemented and have had an important impact on the healthcare and
      health of the UK and
      international populations, and our capacity for carrying out research for
      patient benefit.
    Clinical investigation of patients with suspected or confirmed
        coronary disease
    Since the early post-war period the exercise electrocardiogram (ECG) has
      been the most widely
      performed diagnostic test for stable angina. In March 2010, however, NICE
      guidelines on Chest
        pain of recent onset (CG95) recommended the following: "Do not
        use exercise ECG to diagnose or
        exclude stable angina for people without known CAD". Hemingway was a
      member of the Guideline
      Development Group and his research is cited 16 times in the guideline [a].
      This has led to one of
      the most significant changes in the diagnostic pathway of patients with
      suspected stable angina for
      decades. In the light of recent evidence showing the modest incremental
      value for exercise ECG &#8212;
      the strongest contemporary UK evidence coming from our research &#8212; NICE
      made this bold
      recommendation, which has subsequently been implemented.
    This recommendation has since gone on to change clinical practice. For
      example, an analysis of
      diagnostic testing at the Newcastle Rapid Access Chest Pain Clinic in 2011
      reported that: "The
        proportion of the study population before and after the guidelines
        undergoing exercise testing was
        50.1% vs 0.0%; for calcium score/CT coronary angiography 0.0% vs 14.7%;
        for functional imaging
        25.6% vs 13.4%; and for invasive coronary angiography 15.3% vs 25.8%.
        The proportion not
        requiring further testing was unchanged (30.0% vs 31.0%)" [b].
      An analysis from the Royal Derby
      Hospital in 2013 reported that "implementation of the 2010 NICE
        guidance...resulted in a greater
        proportion of initial discharge to primary care with less frequent
        outpatient review and similar rates
        of referral for coronary angiography" [c].
    CG95 also made recommendations based on our research on sex and ethnicity
      in angina pain.
      The guideline recommended: "Do not define typical and atypical features
        of anginal chest pain and
        non-anginal chest pain differently in men and women" (recommendation
      1.3.3.2) and "Do not
        define typical and atypical features of anginal chest pain and
        non-anginal chest pain differently in
        ethnic groups" (recommendation 1.3.3.3). These two recommendations
      (arising from ref. 5 above)
      for the first time make an unequivocal statement to clinicians that
      typical anginal pain does not
      differ by sex and ethnicity. This is important because it has previously
      been used as a post-hoc
      justification of why rates of procedure use might differ between these
      groups.
    Treatment of patients with angina
    From the perspective of the patient, or the health system payer, one of
      the most significant
      decisions taken among patients with angina relates to the mode of
      revascularisation (coronary
      artery bypass graft [CABG] or percutaneous coronary intervention [PCI]).
      Our work was cited ten
      times in the NICE guidelines on Management of stable angina
      (CH126) issued in July 2011 and
      directly influenced recommendations, all of which were `Key priorities for
      implementation' [d].
    First, `When either procedure would be appropriate, explain to the
        person the risks and benefits of
        PCI and CABG for people with anatomically less complex disease whose
        symptoms are not
        satisfactorily controlled with optimal medical treatment. If the person
        does not express a
        preference, take account of the evidence that suggests that PCI may be
        the more cost-effective
        procedure in selecting the course of treatment.'
    Second, `When either procedure would be appropriate, take into account
        the potential survival
        advantage of CABG over PCI for people with multivessel disease whose
        symptoms are not
        satisfactorily controlled with optimal medical treatment and who have
        diabetes or are over 65 years
        or have anatomically complex three-vessel disease, with or without
        involvement of the left main
        stem.'
    Our published unique `real world' cost and outcome data highlighted the
      prevalence of patients
      who are judged appropriate for both forms of revascularisation (refs [1]
      and [3] above) and
      underpinned to specification of these recommendations. Our UK evidence
      base added to that
      internationally has led to a slowing in the rate of increase of PCI for
      stable coronary disease.
    Co-existing depression among people with myocardial infarction
    Our systematic reviews and meta-analyses of the role of depression in the
      prognosis of coronary
      disease have contributed in part to recommendations in European guidance
      on the need to assess
      psychosocial factors in these patients. Hemingway contributed to the 2007
      guidelines on
      cardiovascular disease prevention in clinical practice from European
      Society of Cardiology, and the
      most recent (2012) guidelines directly cite our work in support of the
      identification of depression as
      a specific risk factor in CVD [e]. These are the strongest
      recommendations to date that clinicians
      might consider psychosocial factors in addition to the better recognised
      behavioural and biological
      factors.
    
ImpactSummary

    Research led by Professor Harry Hemingway at UCL on the quality and
      outcomes of care of
      people with, or at risk of, cardiovascular diseases has informed
      guidelines and clinical
      management in a number of areas. The work influenced NICE guidelines on Chest
        pain of recent
        onset (CG95) with regard to the use of exercise electrocardiography
      (ECG) in the diagnosis of
      stable angina and approaches to sex and ethnicity in diagnosis. Our
      research also underpinned
      recommendations on revascularisation in the NICE guidelines on Management
        of stable angina
      (CH126). Additionally, the research has led to recommendations about the
      need to assess
      psychosocial factors including depression in people with myocardial
      infarction.
    
UnderpinningResearch

    Clinical practice in cardiovascular medicine does not necessarily keep
      pace with evidence-based
      recommendations. Beginning in 1994, Hemingway led a prospective study of
      consecutive patients
      undergoing coronary angiography at three London hospitals. Previous
      studies had suggested that
      `appropriateness' might offer a missing link in optimising clinical
      practice with evidence-based care,
      for several inter-related reasons. However, it was unknown whether these
      ratings of
      appropriateness for coronary revascularisation or coronary angiography
      were valid in terms of
      clinical outcomes. Among consecutive `real world patients' we hypothesised
      that people who were
      appropriate for a procedure but who did not receive it (underuse) would go
      on to experience worse
      outcomes. Ours was the first (and still among the few) studies to
      prospectively test, and confirm,
      this hypothesis [1].
    Our appropriateness studies allowed us to go beyond clinically na&#239;ve but
      widely published crude
      differences in rates of procedures e.g. between ethnic minorities, women
      and men (which are to be
      expected based on well known differences in the epidemiology of coronary
      disease) to assess
      whether procedure rates are clinically fair. What we demonstrated was that
      there was little
      evidence that South Asians had clinically important (in terms of death and
      heart attack risk)
      differences from the rest of the population in appropriateness for
      revascularisation [2].
    We used a novel method to address the clinically important decision
      arising when revascularisation
      with both coronary artery bypass grafting (CABG) and percutaneous coronary
      intervention (PCI)
      are considered clinically appropriate. Based on our formally-defined
      appropriateness criteria, and
      long-term follow up (five years) we demonstrated the cost-effectiveness of
      revascularisation with
      CABG, but showed that revascularisation with PCI was not cost effective [3].
      These results were
      subsequently demonstrated (among selected patients) in randomised trials.
    We exploited linked electronic health records in primary care in Finland
      to provide the first large-scale
      evidence that stable angina has a considerably higher incidence than
      myocardial infarction
      and affects women and men with similar incidence risks. Furthermore,
      stable angina in women,
      among easily identifiable clinical subgroups, has similarly high absolute
      rates of prognostic
      outcomes compared with men [4].
    Between 1996 and 2002 we investigated the role of exercise
      electrocardiography in the initial
      evaluation of people with suspected stable angina and found that it
      contributed little new prognostic
      information beyond simpler clinical measures [5].
    Our systematic reviews and meta-analyses since the late 1990s have tested
      the long-held clinical
      impression that social and psychological factors might influence outcome
      in coronary disease.
      Most recently, in a systematic review looking at depression in particular,
      we found some evidence
      that depression may be important but also identified the need for
      methodological improvements in
      the research [6].
    Our research has led to the establishment of the Farr Institute of Health
      Informatics Research,
      funded to a total of &#163;9.3m from 10 UK funders (including MRC, Wellcome
      Trust, NIHR, British
      Heart Foundation.) We have also established the National Institute of
      Cardiovascular Outcomes
      Research, with &#163;5.3m funding to curate and exploit quality registries for
      acute coronary syndromes
      and other cardiac conditions.
    Key academic co-investigators involved in the research include: Professor
      Gene Feder (initially
      QMUL, Bristol since 2009), Professor Adam Timmis (QMUL), Professor Douglas
      Altman (Oxford).
    