CaseStudyId: 40402
Title: 
    Development of the New Medicines Service increases patient adherence to
      medicines and improves patient safety
    

ImpactDetails

    In 2008, the Department of Health published a white paper entitled Pharmacy
        in England: building on strengths, delivering the future in which it
      outlined the new service which was being developed, referencing the work
      of Barber, Horne and Clifford [a]. This idea was taken forward by
      the Labour government, but then frozen when the election was called. The
      coalition government, however, took up the policy again, naming it the New
      Medicines Service (NMS), and continuing its development through to
      implementation in October 2011 [b]. The Chief Pharmaceutical
      Officer for England has confirmed that "it is the research in question
        that forms the fundamental building block to this important development
        in health policy" [c].
    Barber, Horne and Clifford were involved in the development of the
      service during this period. They participated in stakeholder meetings in
      which the nature of the new service was agreed and the intervention and
      subsequent training designed [c]. Barber and Clifford co-authored
      the questions the pharmacist should ask and also some of the CPPE training
      manual and some of their teaching was put on YouTube to be widely
      available [d]. Barber participated in a series of national day
      long `road show' which visited all Strategic Health Authorities to
      publicise the launch of the service.
    The service is targeted at NHS priority groups and at medicines
      associated with avoidable hospital admissions (typically due to poor
      adherence). Any patient starting a chronic medication who is prescribed a
      diuretic, anticoagulant, or has asthma, chronic obstructive pulmonary
      disease (COPD) or type 2 diabetes is eligible, and should be offered the
      service [e]. The pharmacist sets up a meeting with the patient a
      couple of weeks after the patient presented the prescription and asks a
      series of open questions to elicit the patient's experiences with the
      medicine, their adherence and any problems or questions. The pharmacist
      should explore possible ways to deal with any issues raised. Two weeks
      later the pharmacist contacts the patient again to see if the issues have
      been resolved, to check adherence and to find out whether any further
      advice is needed. The pharmacists are paid for this if patient completes
      the whole process.
    Impacts on patients
    By the end of May 2013, 1,023,697 patients had received the service [f].
    In December 2012, Gary Warner, Chairman of the Pharmaceutical Services
      Negotiating Committee's service development subcommittee (which had
      undertaken an interim evaluation of the NMS based on 224,554 patients)
      commented: "NMS interventions are making a real difference to so many
        patients". The report showed that 32% of formerly non-adherent
      patients became adherent to their medication after the NMS intervention.
      In addition, pharmacists gave 366,702 pieces of healthy living advice to
      patients while they provided the service [g].
    Improved patient safety
    One of the innovations of the service was to encourage pharmacists to
      fill in `yellow cards' reporting adverse drug events. In August 2012 the
      Medicines and Healthcare products Regulatory Agency (MHRA) announced that
      there was a 120% increase in Yellow Card reports received from community
      pharmacists since the launch of the NMS, compared to the same time period
      a year ago, indicating that the service leads to rapid identification of
      side effects of medicines, strengthening the national regulatory process [h].
    Impacts on professional training
    Barber and Clifford were heavily involved in preparing the professional
      training for the NMS prepared by the DH-funded national Centre for
      Pharmacy Postgraduate Education (CPPE) and wrote some of their training
      material. They also made a series of videos for CPPE and ensured that
      these materials were open-access. The reference to this work can be found
      in YouTube videos (see above) and the CPPE open learning programme that
      can be accessed by GPhC members only [i].
    Economic benefits to the NHS
    Elliot's health economic study showed a saving to the NHS of &#163;95.40 per
      patient. The impact assessment prepared for the Government estimated the
      likely costs and benefits of the scheme under various scenarios. Using the
      middle of three scenarios they estimated the net benefits of adopting the
      service to be &#163;1.5bn (discounted) over a 10 year period [j].
    Other national &amp; international schemes
    The research presented above has led to a similar service becoming policy
      in Scotland, where it has been integrated with their chronic medication
      service [k].
    There has been interest from other countries in introducing a similar
      scheme. For example, pharmacists from the Norwegian pharmacy organisation
      Apokus visited the UK in December 2012 to learn about the service. The
      visit followed interest from Norwegian community pharmacies in undertaking
      a pilot NMS for new anticoagulant medicines. The team learnt about the NMS
      and met with individuals involved, including a member of the UCL team
      (James Davies) involved in evaluating the service [l].
    
ImpactSummary

    Work led by Professor Nick Barber at the UCL School of Pharmacy showed
      that a majority of patients have problems soon after starting a new
      medicine for a chronic condition, and this led to the development of a
      post-consultation intervention by pharmacists that was shown to be more
      effective and cheaper than normal care. This entered Department of Health
      policy for pharmacy in 2008 and Barber helped design the New Medicines
      Service that was launched in October 2011. This service is offered by
      community pharmacists in England and by the end of May 2013 over a million
      patients had received the service. The intervention increases patient
      adherence to medication, thus improving quality of care, and reducing cost
      to the NHS from wastage. It also improves patient safety through better
      identification and resolution of adverse effects.
    
UnderpinningResearch

    Professor Nick Barber at the UCL School of Pharmacy, along with
      colleagues at Kings College London and Birmingham Universities, received a
      Department of Health (DH) policy research grant on prescribing in 1995. A
      study on doctor-patient communication interviewed a series of patients
      after consultation with their GP. This revealed that many patients felt
      that they had not been able to raise the issues that they had in fact
      wished to raise before the consultation took place, resulting in
      misunderstandings on both sides. One significant consequence of this was
      that many patients did not take prescribed medicines as advised [1, 2].
      Analysis of the consultations showed that `biomedical' consultations had
      worse consequences in terms of adherence than `lifeworld' ones (i.e. those
      that engaged with the patient's life and preferences) [3]. As a
      pharmacist, it seemed to Barber that patients' lives could be made better
      via professional intervention after the consultation and after they had
      experienced the medicine, and helping them solve their medicine-related
      problems in a patient-centred way via consideration of their individual
      needs and concerns.
    On the basis of these findings, Barber (as PI) was funded in 2001, along
      with Rob Horne as co- investigator (then University of Brighton, now UCL
      School of Pharmacy) and Sarah Clifford (then UCL School of Pharmacy), by
      NW Thames Regional Health Authority to conduct a larger, quantitative
      study involving 258 patients recruited from 23 community pharmacies in
      south east England. It showed that 10 days after starting a new medicine,
      around one third of patients were non-adherent and two thirds stated that
      they had problems or concerns regarding their medicines [4].
    In 2003, NW Thames then funded Barber (with Horne, Clifford and Rachel
      Elliott, University of Manchester) to develop and evaluate a service to
      improve adherence. The team designed a telephone-based pharmacy advice
      service, guided by the self-regulatory model, which recognises that
      adherence to medication is frequently influenced by symptoms or beliefs
      about the illness that are unique to each patient. The theory was used in
      training the pharmacists to adopt a patient- centred approach. The
      intervention was designed to elicit patients' experiences with, and
      concerns about, their new medicine; this was then used as a starting point
      for the pharmacists to meet each individual's specific needs with
      information and advice. As non-adherence to new medicines for chronic
      conditions develops rapidly, the team developed a service in which a
      pharmacist telephoned patients two weeks after they had started a new
      medicine for a chronic condition. The pharmacist listened to the patient's
      problems and gave advice or information if needed. In this study the
      effectiveness, safety, utility and the patient acceptability of the
      service were assessed. The service was then tested in a proof-of-concept
      randomised controlled trial involving forty pharmacies across England. It
      was found that the proportion of non-adherent patients was significantly
      reduced in the intervention group [5]. What is more, the patients'
      beliefs regarding their medicines became on balance more positive [6].
      The study included a health economic evaluation (led by Elliott) that
      followed up patients' utilisation of health resources, modelled them and
      calculated incremental cost effectiveness ratios. The intervention was 90%
      likely to be both cheaper and more effective than normal care due to more
      efficient medicines usage [7].
    