CaseStudyId: 40410
Title: 
    Amyloidosis and acute phase proteins: world leading clinical service
    

ImpactDetails

    The NHS National Amyloidosis Centre (NAC) established by Pepys and
      Hawkins in 1999 is directly funded by the NHS to provide diagnostic and
      clinical management services for the national caseload of patients with
      amyloidosis [a]. Patient flow has increased uninterruptedly from
      ~40 new patients in 1999-2000. Within the assessment period, annual
      patient flow and NHS funding have increased from 1877 patient evaluations
      / &#163;2,239,000 in 2008 to 3444 cases / &#163;5,356,000 in 2013 [b]. Since
      2008, 2,950 new and 10,955 completed follow up assessments comprise ~70%
      of all UK amyloidosis patients, representng the largest, most diverse
      cohort of amyloidosis patients worldwide. Since 2012, the Centre has
      provided an online amyloidosis genetic testing service for the UK [c].
    Improving diagnosis. Our correction of the diagnosis of
      amyloidosis (see [3,4]) in about 5% of new cases per year
      underpins steady improvement in mortality and outcome measures. Combining
      genetic and proteomic testing with refined immunohistochemistry has
      increased definitive amyloid fibril typing, which is key for appropriate
      treatment, from ~70% to ~98%.
    Our development of CT-SPECT 123I-SAP imaging, as part of
      2,100 total SAP scans p.a., enables evaluation of individual organ amyloid
      load and localised amyloid deposits in non-visceral sites. We have
      introduced CT-SPECT with 99mTc-DPD scintigraphy, repurposing
      this diphosphonate bone tracer for diagnosis, typing and serial evaluation
      of cardiac ATTR amyloidosis as outlined in [5], leading directly
      to installation of a new NHS CT-SPECT suite in 2012, and new recurrent NHS
      funding from April 2012 of &#163;250,000 p.a. Our sophisticated novel cardiac
      MRI for evaluation of cardiac amyloidosis has won a further &#163;250,000 p.a.
      of recurrent central NHS funding [b].
    Improving disease staging and monitoring. Our further refinement
      and validation of serum biomarkers for staging disease severity have been
      adopted by pharma and academia in the first industry and academic Phase
      III clinical trials of chemotherapy in AL amyloidosis [d,e].
      Recommendations for treatment of AL amyloidosis with the
      cyclophosphamide-bortezomib-dexamethasone chemotherapy regimen we reported
      [8], and for the new response criteria we reported in [7]
      have been adopted in April 2013 guidelines issued by The National
      Comprehensive Cancer Network (NCCN), an alliance of the world's leading
      cancer centres [f]. Consensus of experts on a modern framework for
      clinical trial design and drug development in AL amyloidosis was agreed at
      the first Roundtable on Clinical Research in Immunoglobulin Light-chain
      Amyloidosis (AL), a meeting sponsored by the Amyloidosis Foundation
      (Clarkston, MI, USA) in 2010, and published in 2012 [e].
    Improving treatment and survival. Refined use of serum free light
      chain measurements has greatly improved monitoring of responses to
      chemotherapy in AL amyloidosis [2]. We have also demonstrated the
      feasibility and limitations of solid organ transplantation in amyloidosis.
      With careful selection, approximately 2% of patients receive an organ and
      outcomes match those in general transplant registries; renal
      transplantation in AL amyloidosis, the most serious type, has doubled
      during the past 5 years. Almost all patients with AL amyloidosis attending
      the Centre now benefit from combination chemotherapy regimens that include
      the novel proteasome inhibitor agent, bortezomib. This and other new high
      cost, high efficacy drugs, licensed in the past 6 years for treatment of
      myeloma, are available on the NHS to almost all patients with AL
      amyloidosis as a direct result of our published clinical research work [g],
      which completely changed the chemotherapy paradigm. Enforcement of the
      necessary funding was achieved in association with the British Society of
      Haematology, the UK Amyloidosis Network (led by us) and crucially the
      patient support charity, Myeloma UK. Survival of AL amyloidosis patients
      under the care of the National Amyloidosis Centre has improved
      substantially during the past 12 years: (NAC figures: 4 yr survival 2001-3
      was 34%; 2004-7 was 38%; 2008-2012 was 50%).
    The Centre's advances are rapidly disseminated to specialist centres and
      collaborations internationally through scientific/medical publications,
      international meetings and personal contacts. We established the UK
      Amyloidosis Network (2009) attracting over 150 participants at the
      February 2013 annual meeting [h], and the ONS-based epidemiology
      study of amyloidosis incidence (~5-10 per million p.a. in England),
      enabling clinical service development in the UK. We lately created the UK
      Amyloidosis Awareness Group (UKAAG) with whom the NAC has developed a
      comprehensive website [h, i] patient information literature and a
      regular newsletter to enable patient and public engagement and promote
      awareness of this rare disease. Myeloma UK have confirmed: "The recent
        creation of UKAAG has been warmly welcomed and has given patients an
        important platform to formally feed in their views about their treatment
        and care. In particular the creation of a comprehensive website with
        high-quality information about amyloidosis, that can be trusted 100%,
        provides a great deal of comfort." [i]
    The Centre has received charitable donations from patients, relatives,
      friends and other supporters, as direct gifts and via wide ranging
      charitable fund raising events organised entirely by donors, enabling
      flexible support for new research and patient care initiatives in the
      Centre for Amyloidosis and Acute Phase Proteins and National Amyloidosis
      Centre; total funds donated are over &#163;1.2 million [j].
    
ImpactSummary

    The UCL Centre for Amyloidosis and Acute Phase Proteins conducts
      world-leading research and development that has rapidly fed through to
      patient care. These include advances in the diagnosis of amyloidosis and
      clinical characterisation of many new subtypes including genetic forms,
      development and application of new biomarkers to monitor disease activity
      and progress, new modalities of imaging and better treatment. The
      consequences have been new standards of clinical care adopted nationally
      and internationally, improved and more accurate diagnosis, steady
      improvements in the outcomes of this disease, major investment by the NHS
      and adoption of new clinical metrics by the pharmaceutical industry to
      enable research on specific new therapies currently in development.
    
UnderpinningResearch

    Amyloidosis is a disorder characterised by organ failure resulting from
      the accumulation of protein as abnormal fibres. There are various types
      notably including those arising as a result of long-standing inflammation
      (AA amyloidosis) or secondary to a haematological malignancy, myeloma (AL
      amyloidosis) or in association with ageing (ATTR amyloidosis). Highlights
      of the extensive clinical research programme in amyloidosis at UCL that
      have led to better management of these patients include:
    Elucidation of the crucial precursor-product relationship in amyloid
        fibrillogenesis, which underlies pathogenesis and thus treatment.
      Seminal studies in unprecedentedly large patient populations with AA [1]
      and AL [2] amyloidosis have demonstrated for the first time the
      relationships between production of the amyloid fibril precursor proteins
      serum amyloid A protein (SAA) and monoclonal immunoglobulin free light
      chains (FLC) respectively with amyloid load and clinical outcome. These
      studies not only systematically demonstrated the capacity for regression
      of amyloid following treatment of underlying disorders, encouraging a
      proactive approach to treat the underlying cause, but defined monitoring
      of SAA and FLC concentration as standards of care in AA and AL amyloidosis
      that enable treatment strategies to be guided by their early effect on
      these accessible measurements.
    Understanding of key aspects of hereditary amyloidosis. Until our
      genetic study [3], hereditary systemic amyloidosis was thought to
      be incredibly rare and to affect only a few dozen families worldwide. Most
      affected patients either remained undiagnosed or were incorrectly assumed
      to have AL amyloidosis resulting in needless and harmful chemotherapy. Our
      study of 350 patients identified a hereditary cause in 10% of cases,
      resulting in genetic testing being introduced in the NHS National
      Amyloidosis Centre as a new standard of care. We have subsequently
      identified more than 70 patients with hereditary renal amyloidosis, and
      have characterised the phenotype, diagnostic pathway and role of organ
      transplantation in this subtype [4].
    Design and introduction of powerful new diagnostic imaging methods.
      We invented 123I-serum amyloid P component scintigraphy in
      1990 to image amyloid deposits in vivo, and during the past 5 years have
      developed 3D high resolution dual modality CT-SPECT (single-photon
      emission computed tomography) to enable accurate quantification and
      characterisation of amyloid in non-visceral sites. We have also developed
      99mTc-DPD scintigraphy to image cardiac amyloid deposits of
      transthyretin (ATTR) type, repurposing this diphosphonate radionuclide
      tracer to enable diagnosis and clinical assessment of elderly patients
      with this hitherto very difficult to diagnose disorder. We were the first
      group to systematically demonstrate the utility of cardiac magnetic
      resonance imaging (CMR) in 2005 [5], and have subsequently
      developed specific CMR methods to characterise and quantify cardiac
      amyloid deposits of all types.
    Major advances in monitoring of disease and therapy. We have led
      and participated in major international collaborative studies that have
      evaluated and defined the clinical utility of various biomarkers to stage
      severity of disease [6] and monitor response to treatment [7]
      in AL amyloidosis, the most common and serious type of the disease. These
      findings have now been adopted throughout the world, both for specialist
      clinical practice and in clinical trials. Our clinical studies of cyclic
      multiple agent chemotherapy [8] have defined current best practice
      for the majority of AL amyloidosis patients who are not fit enough to
      undergo stem cell transplantation.
    This research was led by Professor Philip Hawkins and Professor Sir Mark
      Pepys of the UCL Centre for Amyloidosis and Acute Phase Proteins.
    