CaseStudyId: 40440
Title: 
    Limits to individual choice in health research involving human
        subjects
    

ImpactDetails

    The potential social benefits of life and medical science are at once
      indeterminate and incalculable,
      and the research outlined above has helped to improve the validity and
      hence social value of
      controlled trials around the world. Beneficiaries include both the
      organisers of, and participants in,
      trials themselves, but also extend to all the patients to whom the results
      of those trials apply.
      Edwards' work relates to the considerable number of clinical trials run
      each year. For example, in
      2012, the UK regulator approved 952 applications to run clinical trials of
      new medicinal drugs. In the
      same year, figures from the National Institute of Health Research (NIHR)
      show that almost 638,000
      patients volunteered for clinical trials in the UK.
    Those benefits accrue particularly from the use of Edwards' research to
      inform significant changes
      in the guidelines of bodies governing the conduct of research both
      internationally and in individual
      countries (the UK, Europe, US, and Canada), including supporting
      improvements in the
      international governance of cluster trials delivered in developing
      countries. The numbers of such
      trials are increasing as more vaccines, educational and behavioural
      interventions are evaluated. In
      turn, this has led to changes in the ways in which research trials are
      conducted, particularly by
      ensuring the use of a more robust ethical framework for participants.
      Edwards' research has also
      benefited individuals participating in controlled trials by promoting
      autonomous participation
      (especially informed withdrawal) throughout trials &#8212; rather than only at
      the point of consent &#8212; and by
      protecting the rights and interests of individuals in defined communities
      recruited for cluster trials. In
      so doing, the research has helped to address the problem of `missing data'
      from trial drop-outs.
    In 2008 the Canadian National Institute for Health (NIH) funded a project
      [a] to produce the first
      internationally recognised guidelines on the ethics of cluster trials,
      based on Edwards' longstanding
      work on moral problems in such trials. Edwards was invited to join the
      project's Canadian Working
      Group, which met in Ottawa in 2009; this group comprised biostatisticians
      (including the person
      who invented the cluster design), methodologists, trialists, health policy
      professionals from WHO,
      and another bioethicist [1]. The Working Group wrote the Ottawa
        Statement on the ethical conduct
      of cluster trials, with a pr&#233;cis in the BMJ [1], which is used by
      researchers and ethics committees for
      guidance on the design and conduct of such trials. Edwards contributed
      particularly to
      Recommendation 14 of that Statement, which recognises that clusters may
      contain vulnerable
      participants and obliges researchers and ethics committees to consider the
      need for additional
      protections ensuring that consent procedures are appropriate for such
      participants. Furthermore,
      the Statement's fundamental recognition that inequalities may exist within
      clusters, and might be
      exacerbated by participation in the research, is explicitly based on [d]
      (see section 3 in [1]).
    Following the Working Group meeting, its representatives presented the
      resultant Statement,
      including Recommendation 14, at a meeting in July 2013 of the US
      Secretary's Advisory Committee
      on Human Research Protections (SACHRP); this meeting prepared the first
      publicly available
      recommendations in the US on how the US Department of Health and Human
      Services (HHS) and
      Food and Drug Administration (FDA) regulations should be applied to
      cluster trials. These
      recommendations will, for the first time, guide investigators of all
        FDA funded trials of this sort as
      well as their Institutional Review Boards. The SACHRP discussed the
      recommendations at the
      meeting for final approval in October 2013 [2].
    In 2010, Edwards contributed to a World Health Organisation (WHO)
      Working Party set up to
      produce guidelines on the ethics of patient safety research [3]. Those
      guidelines, which were
      published in 2013, provide guidance on patient safety in research taking
      place in resource-poor
      contexts. Recognising that many projects on patient safety resemble
      cluster study designs,
      Edwards' research [d] was cited to support the first guidance point that
      "vulnerable populations
      should not be differentially exposed to any extra risks brought up by the
      research without good
      reason, to avoid exacerbating inequalities". This point responded directly
      to the findings in [d].
    As part of her research in Mumbai, Edwards piloted a study of this WHO
      guidance point in an
      international cluster trial of health services. The study was designed to
      develop and test a model
      strategy to improve women's and children's health in 40 Mumbai
      communities; it was funded by the
      Wellcome Trust and led by Dr David Osrin of UCL. The 24,000 households
      recruited, from February
      2012 to present, benefited from access to health services [g].
    In April 2013, the World Medical Association (WMA) released for public
      comment a draft revision of
      the Declaration of Helsinki. Although not binding in itself, it is
      widely recognised as the most
      authoritative guidance for human research ethics, and provides a basis for
      the regulation of
      research around the world. For example, it is enshrined in the EU
      Directive on, and UK regulations
      for, clinical trials which cover all investigational medicinal products.
      Following the release of the
      April 2013 draft revision, and based on her philosophical and empirical
      work, Edwards was invited
      in July 2013 by the Chair of the Working Party to draft a clause on the
      right to withdraw [4].
    Edwards' research has further improved the development and
        implementation of clinical trials
        through its use as the basis for professional training. Again, the
      reach of these impacts
      extends both across and significantly beyond the UK. The National
        Research Ethics Service
      (NRES) oversees the operation of 69 NHS research ethics committees whose
      approval is legally
      required for clinical research projects in the UK. In 2008, Edwards was
      awarded a competitive
      contract to provide research-based training to members of NHS and Social
      Care committees. Since
      2008, she has provided training on consent and its limits for 160
      committee members, based on her
      research and its uptake in professional and legal guidelines [5]. Ninety
      percent of members scored
      the content of her training as 4-6 on a six-point scale.
    This training also led to sustained refinements in the advice
        provided by the NRES. In 2011 the
      NRES training lead, who had attended Edwards' training sessions, included
      her arguments in
      favour of limiting the right to withdraw from research (developed in [a])
      in Article 6.2.2 of NRES'
      official policy document on Participant Information on "What will happen
      if I don't want to carry on
      with the study?" [6]. Governed by this document, 10,883 research
        projects were approved by NHS
      and Social Care ethics committees in England between December 2011 and
      March 2013 [7]. The
      recognition of Edwards' framework as best practice is indicated by the
      fact that this Article will be
      retained in a major revision of this document in 2013 [6].
    The Association of Research Ethics Committees (AREC), an
      independent umbrella group for
      research ethics committees, provides training and resources for more than
      2,500 members across
      the UK. In 2012 it invited Edwards to draft a short guide to cluster
      trials after committee members
      asked for guidance on this topic, in light of the increasing numbers of
      cluster trials they were asked
      to review [9]. That draft was approved for publication in early 2013 by
      the AREC board and is now
      increasingly used for training, since AREC organises the full training
      programme for NRES [8].
    Edwards drew on her research to develop and deliver a large-scale
        continuous professional
        development programme on research ethics and governance through UCL
      Partners, an academic
      health-science partnership based in the south-east of England. Between
      2009 and July 2013, she
      trained 493 researchers over 7 one-day events, a substantial component of
      which focused on the
      issue of consent and its limits in research. The training course was rated
      3-5 on a five-point scale
      by 92% of delegates [9].
    
ImpactSummary

    Patients in clinical trials tend to have a very high drop-out rate which
      compromises results.
      Research by Sarah Edwards provided the key ethical framework for limiting
      individual choice in
      designing research involving human subjects. Edwards' research, showing
      how such designs can
      legitimately limit individual choices to withdraw, was incorporated into
      guidelines in the UK, Canada
      and the US, and by international bodies such as the World Health
      Organisation. In the UK, the
      research was also used to develop guidelines for ethics committees
      approving controlled trials.
    
UnderpinningResearch

    It was widely assumed that subjects of clinical trials reserve `absolute
      (wholly inalienable) rights to
      withdraw from a programme of research at any time and without giving a
      reason. Herein, the right to
      withdraw is treated as a simple extension of the right to refuse to
      participate all together. Research
      by Dr Sarah J. L. Edwards (Senior Lecturer in Research Ethics and
      Governance at UCL, 2008 &#8212; present)
      explores the moral justifications for limiting individual choice in order
      to improve
      methodological efficiency and promote autonomous participation (especially
      informed withdrawal) in
      different research designs and contexts. Edwards' work has included
      consideration of what consent
      means in research participation and of the adverse effects introduced by
      offering an unconditional
      `right' of withdrawal. She used findings of this work to suggest that
      participants should, at consent,
      assume some responsibility for the internal validity of the trial.
    There are two strands to this research. The first is a philosophical
        analysis of justifications for
        placing limits on a research subject's right to withdraw from
      research once initial consent has
      been granted. In 2011, Edwards developed the idea that research subjects
      should, at the time of
      consent, relinquish some of the (hitherto standard) unconditional rights
      to withdraw. She developed
      a philosophical and legal analysis of contractual relationships between
      researchers and their
      subjects, arguing that subjects cannot be said, individually and
      separately, to assume moral duties
      to future patients simply by consenting to participate in a trial. This is
      because any single subject
      cannot be said to have caused any individual patient harm in the
      future. Rather, a single subject
      contributes only to the statistical problem of missing data (resulting in
      underpowered or biased trial
      evidence), which could then mislead doctors resulting in the prescription
      of ineffective or harmful
      treatments [a]. This argument was based on earlier work (2005) in which
      Edwards developed the
      first philosophical analysis of autonomous participation in research
      (beyond the notion of simple
      consent) by limiting or qualifying rights to withdraw.
    In April-June 2012, she completed a survey of 262 responding members of
      NHS research ethics
      committees, which found that they would welcome her proposal for policies
      specifically qualifying a
      research subject's right to withdraw in the context of weight management
      trials [b]. Methods of
      reducing withdrawal rates included provision of information at consent and
      at the point of
      withdrawal, in emphasising the probable consequences for the results, as
      well as asking those who
      withdraw for their reasons. These methods were piloted in trials conducted
      in July 2011-December
      2012 through the UCL Clinical Trials Unit, including a Bupa funded
      surgical randomised control trial,
      QUEST (Quality of life after mastectomy and breast reconstruction) [c]. A
      focus group discussion in
      July 2013 with patients and the public showed similar support for the case
      to limit subjects' right to
      withdraw from trials.
    The second strand is a philosophical analysis of fair recruitment of
        people to cluster trials,
      wherein consent from individuals to be randomly allocated, in groups or
      clusters, to treatments is
      limited to a greater or lesser extent. Cluster trials involve
      allocating groups (rather than individuals)
      to receive different treatments. In 2011, Edwards developed her
      preliminary taxonomy of consent
      by clarifying the options open to individual members of clusters and
      exploring the feasibility of
      individuals withdrawing from treatments assigned to these clusters. This,
      the first philosophical
      analysis of fair recruitment to cluster trials, explained their tendency,
      over traditional randomised
      controlled trials (RCTs), to exacerbate pre-existing inequalities between
      groups, showing why
      standard measures of redressing inequalities in research ex post
      may not be helpful [d]. How
      clusters are identified and selected may be partially determined by their
      statistical efficiency (the
      fewer individuals within each cluster, the better). Edwards argues that
      this concern should be
      balanced against the perceived strength and social cohesion of
      pre-existing communities, and the
      consequences for overall health status. These questions can be gauged
      empirically through
      community engagement exercises. In Autumn 2012 Edwards and Dr David Osrin
      (UCL Institute for
      Global Health) organised the study of a target cluster trial, involving
      health resource centres in
      Mumbai, where groups were defined by geographical landmarks between
      dwellings for
      convenience. For this trial, the researchers enrolled 40 Mumbai slum
      communities of at least
      24,000 households [e].
    However, the problem of showing what needs to happen for the just
      treatment of patients in cluster
      trials, and what choices individuals should be allowed to make, might
      depend critically on the
      context within which the need for research arises. Edwards subsequently
      showed that, during a
      public health emergency involving a new pathogen, cluster trials could
      better respond to problems
      of justice than can traditional RCTs because cluster trials allow the
      introduction of new treatments
      incrementally (to groups which are already segregated to contain the
      communicable disease)
      thereby better respecting individuals' right to health [f].
    