CaseStudyId: 40526
Title: 
    Situational crime prevention policy and practice
    

ImpactDetails

    Policing and broader criminal justice responses to crime have
      traditionally focussed on catching offenders post offence, and
      administering punishments to deter future offending. Against the grain of
      this bias towards reactive approaches, the mission of SCS has been to
      develop models of evidence-based crime prevention policies and practices.
      Through direct engagement of end users, SCS has had significant impacts in
      helping to redress this bias. These have been felt both on broader crime
      prevention policies and routine policing practices, and on specific crime
      problems.
    Informing and influencing policy and practice in the UK and
          overseas
    Crime prevention policies in the UK have been strongly influenced by SCP
      and POP, and SCS research has played an important role in this. The
      research findings showing the effectiveness of these approaches have been
      conveyed to policymakers through knowledge exchange activities, testimony
      to select committees, and membership of key advisory bodies. In 2010, for
      example, Laycock drew on SCS research when she appeared before the House
      of Commons Select Committee on Home Affairs to argue for the greater use
      of situational crime prevention. In its subsequent report to Parliament
      later that year the Committee responded directly to Laycock's testimony
      welcoming "the renewed emphasis given to designing-out crime in the
        Cutting Crime strategy and the establishment of the Home Secretary's
        Design and Technology Alliance" [1, p. 55].
    Since 2011, Wortley has contributed to the Minister's Forum for
      Innovation in Crime Prevention, which helps shape government policy on
      crime prevention. A letter from the Home Office states: "The work of
        the Department and its advocacy for, and expertise in, situational crime
        prevention strategies are well known by officials responsible for Crime
        policy within the Home Office and to the experts within my own area,
        Home Office Science, whose task it is to ensure that we provide the best
        evidence on which to base policy developments". As an example it is
      noted that "at a recent Forum `away-day' he [Wortley] led a session on
        preventing theft from the person, which is one of the only crime types
        to have increased recently, and in particular focussed on the need to
        convert good ideas for prevention into concrete policies and practices"
      [2].
    SCS staff also have worked directly with police forces and crime
        prevention agencies internationally, through continuing professional
      development courses, workshops, seminars, consultancy, and the provision
      of advice to provide concrete examples of how SCP and POP may be
      implemented in practice. For example, in 2003 the New Zealand Police
      approached researchers at the SCS for assistance with their implementation
      of evidence-based crime prevention policies. Since 2008, SCS staff have
      visited New Zealand on three occasions: in 2010 Laycock contributed to a
      research symposium at the NZ Police College; in 2012 Chainey spent 3 weeks
      delivering training courses to NZ police across the country; and in 2013,
      Laycock spent a month delivering specialist workshops to police analysts
      and leaders (totalling over 20 seminars and 400 participants). The New
      Zealand Police explicitly credits SCS with a significant role in shaping
      their crime strategies and helping to reduce crime: "The Jill Dando
        institute (JDI) has made a significant contribution to the development
        of crime science and intelligence led policing in New Zealand. We are
        grateful to JDI staff and associates who have increased our knowledge
        base, contributed to the development of our key products and
        fundamentally helped evolve the mindset within the New Zealand Police
        over the last 10 years...Over the past 4 years we have achieved sizeable
        reductions in crime against a backdrop of very high (and improving)
        levels of public trust and confidence in Police" [4]. The adoption
      of crime science strategies has received extensive coverage in New
      Zealand's media, wherein the role of the SCS is explicitly acknowledged,
      arguably contributing to the reported increased levels of public
      confidence in police [4].
    Facilitating reductions in specific crimes
    The impacts of our work on bike theft [c, d] have been
      particularly significant given the emphasis placed by health authorities
      and governments on promoting greater use of bicycles to improve health and
      reduce congestion. The British Crime Survey (2010/11) indicates that some
      500,000 bicycles are stolen every year. The SCS/CSM collaborative research
      has had significant impacts on helping to reduce that number. Following
      the demonstration of improved locking practices associated with CaMden
      bike stands, manufacture of the new stands was undertaken by Broxap Ltd
      who have reported that 1,202 were rolled out nationally between 2008-13
      [6]. In recognition of this project, Johnson and colleagues were invited
      to write a Problem Oriented Policing guide (POP Guide 52) for the US
      Department of Justice POP Center on Bicycle Theft [5]. This has proven an
      important source of information for national and international crime
      prevention professionals operating in this area, having been downloaded
      more than 11,000 times per year since its publication in 2008 (according
      to popcenter.org). Bike theft became a focus for Transport for London
      (TfL) and the London Metropolitan Police, and with the assistance of SCS
      they undertook a prevention project. A letter from TfL [7] states: `The
        academic work undertaken by the JDI became the starting point for our
        cycle theft project, particularly the POP Guide 52: Bicycle Theft ....
        Using a partnership approach we achieved a 5.4% decrease in cycle theft
        in London during 2010/11 (1253 fewer offences). The
        approach has been recognised internationally and was awarded the 2011
        Herman Goldstein (award) for Excellence in Problem Oriented Policing'.
    Largely due to increased media coverage, internal child sex
        trafficking has, in recent years, been widely recognised in the UK
      as a pressing public issue. SCS research has challenged the perception,
      dominating public debate, that internal sex trafficking is a racially
      motivated crime [e, f]. Extensive media coverage of the research by, among
      others, Newsnight, Huffington Post, Guardian, Independent [8], has
      extended the reach of the research and informed public understanding of
      the issues. Through these and other contributions to the development of a
      lively national debate, the SCS research has also influenced the
      formulation of national policies on tackling this issue, including the
      Child Exploitation and Online Protection Centre (CEOP) Thematic
      Assessment, `Out of Mind, Out of Sight' (2011); Metropolitan Police
      Authority Report on Child Sexual Exploitation (2011); and the UK National
      Action Plan on Tackling Child Sexual Exploitation (2001) [9]. SCS enjoys a
      fruitful relationship with SOCA (now NCA), supported both by research
      student internships with the Agency and by Brayley's status (since 2013)
      as a fulltime investigator. The practical value of the research is
      acknowledged by the Agency: "Of particular value in recent years has
        been the work done by the Department around the topic of Internal Child
        Sex Trafficking (ICST)... In 2010, SOCA actively supported two research
        projects carried out by Professor Gloria Laycock with two masters
        students, Ella Cockbain and Helen Brayley. One project examined the
        social networks of offenders and victims and the other deconstructed the
        offence into a `crime script'. The research has been influential in
        helping to shape SOCA's response to ICST" [6].
    Drawing on the body of SCP research carried out within the SCS, and
      working within the partnership models outlined by Tilley [a, b], staff
      have shared their expert advice with police forces, crime
      prevention practitioners, and criminal justice policy makers, both
      domestically and abroad.
    
ImpactSummary

    Research produced by UCL's Department of Security &amp; Crime Science
      (SCS) and Jill Dando Institute of Security &amp; Crime Science has been
      used in the UK and internationally to shape policies and guide practices
      using situational methods to prevent crime. Working closely with police
      forces, crime prevention practitioners and policy makers, SCS staff have
      provided evidence, expertise and advice to support particular crime
      prevention initiatives and approaches to crime prevention more broadly.
      The impact of the research is demonstrated by acknowledged contributions
      to policy, policing and crime prevention practices, and to fighting the
      specific crimes of bike theft and internal child sex trafficking.
    
UnderpinningResearch

    UCL Security &amp; Crime Science (SCS) is a world-leading centre for
      situational crime prevention (SCP) theory and practice. Research in this
      field involves: (i) analysing specific crime problems in order to identify
      the situational factors that enable or encourage them; (ii) devising
      strategies to modify immediate environments in order to reduce
      opportunities and incentives for crime; and (iii) implementing, evaluating
      and, if necessary, modifying these countermeasures. Because SCP targets
      the proximal causes of crime it is of great utility to police and policy
      makers, who are interested in practical solutions to immediate crime
      problems. The impacts described here are directed at two levels of
      application and are underpinned by research conducted by Professors Shane
      Johnson (UCL 2004-present), Gloria Laycock (UCL 2001-present), and Nick
      Tilley (UCL 2008-present), and Dr Aiden Sidebottom (lecturer, UCL
      2012-present).
    (1) SCP as a general model of prevention. This line of research
      aims to have SCP principles adopted as routine policy and practice in
      policing and crime prevention more generally. Here, the problem-solving
      method underpinning SCP is central. Tilley is a leading authority on the
      delivery of SCP through Problem Oriented Policing (POP), with which it has
      close affinities, and since joining UCL in 2008 he has worked with other
      SCS researchers to refine the implementation of POP approaches. One study
      undertook the successful implementation of a supermarket bag-theft
      prevention project (involving the design of a new shopping trolley)
      carried out in collaboration with Warwickshire Police and Warwickshire
      Council. This project is used to argue more generally for a partnership
      model in which universities can work more closely with police and other
      agencies [a]. Another study surveyed 203 practitioners in order to
      identify the use, and perceived strengths and weaknesses, of various
      problem-solving models [b]. Drawing on these findings the authors examined
      the implications for an improved problem oriented model of crime
      prevention.
    (2) Preventing specific forms of crime. SCP focuses on specific
      forms of crime in specific contexts. We have selected two crimes &#8212; bicycle
      theft and internal child sex trafficking &#8212; to illustrate our breadth,
      multidisciplinarity, engagement, and impact.
    Bicycle theft: A collaboration between Johnson and designers from
      Central St Martin's (CSM) College of Art and Design led to the development
      of strategies to help reduce bike theft (2005-2010). Johnson directed the
      empirical work, analysing environmental factors contributing to bike
      theft, and evaluating the efficacy of proposed solutions. In a scoping
      study in 2005-06, poor locking practices were identified as a key problem
      for bicycles parked in the street; existing n-shaped stands not
      encouraging the locking of all components of the bicycle (wheels and
      frame), with 70% of bicycles inadequately secured [c]. Based on this
      research, the CaMden (M-shaped) bike stand was developed to encourage
      cyclists to secure all components of their bike. Research in 2007
      involving 2,268 observations found that the CaMden stands facilitated
      significantly better locking practice than other prototypes and n-shaped
      stands. Additional research showed that locking practices improved
      significantly when correct locking instructions were posted on bike stands
      [d].
    Internal child sex trafficking: Research at SCS shows that those
      who sexually offend against children are strongly influenced by
      situational factors. Laycock, with two research students (Ella Cockbain
      and Helen Brayley), worked with the Serious and Organised Crime Agency
      (SOCA), now the National Crime Agency (NCA) in 2010 to apply SCP to
      trafficking by groups of offenders within the UK of children for the
      purposes of sexual exploitation. One study [e] examined the social
      networks of offenders and victims to map connections that support the
      abuse and which might be disrupted. For example, in one case they
      identified an offender network built around a central ringleader and
      argued that targeting this individual might dissolve the network. Another
      study [f] developed a `crime script' &#8212; a detailed breakdown of the steps
      involved in the crime commission process, designed to identify
      `pinch-points' for prevention &#8212; for internal child sex trafficking. For
      example, the identification of strategies employed by offenders to locate
      and groom girls for abuse provided important insights allowing the
      development of advice for potential victims on self-protection strategies.
    