CaseStudyId: 44229
Title: 
    Statistical Parametric Mapping
    

ImpactDetails

    Before SPM there was no principled framework or easily usable software
      that could be used to analyse and report functional brain images in the
      scientific literature or elsewhere. By creating that ability in a
      principled and extensible theoretical framework, the underpinning research
      led to the establishment and dramatic growth of an entirely new scientific
      field, imaging neuroscience. Establishing a new scientific field
      has created a wide range of beneficiaries, including commercial
      manufacturers (such as Siemens, Phillips and GE Healthcare) who provide
      the brain scanners to such a new field.
    SPM is used by academic neuroscientists, healthcare professionals and
      neuroimaging consultants to analyse brain-imaging data. The basic
      operations, of describing the imaging experiment in the form of a GLM and
      interrogating the statistical results, are usually implemented via a
      simple Graphical User Interface. Maps showing regions of significant
      change can then be surfed in an interactive viewer.
    The SPM software is released under a General Public Licence (GPL),
      meaning that users are free to run the software, as well as to share
      (copy, distribute), study and modify it. This greatly simplifies code
      transparency and provides a software platform for the brain imaging
      community to develop new technologies. A broad community of academic
      neuroscientists and healthcare professionals has adopted SPM which is
      disseminated using a proven delivery pipeline comprising (I) release of
      open source software (II) delivery of specialised short courses (III)
      collaborative research (IV) email support [a]. SPM is currently
      the most widely used software package globally for brain imaging analysis
      and now has 4,500 subscribers on its mailing list. A recent systematic
      study of methods used to analyse brain imaging data showed SPM to be the
      most popular software worldwide, used in 64% of studies (compared to 13.9%
      for each of its two nearest rivals) [b].
    Clinical Applications
    SPM has been used by the neuroimaging company Imagilys to develop
      a commercial product, BrainMagix, for use in brain surgery [c].
      People with brain tumours, for example, may require surgery to remove
      malignant tissue. The goal of surgery is to remove cancerous tissue
      without damaging important parts of the brain. If structural imaging shows
      damage close to language areas, for example, then patients will have fMRI
      scans prior to surgery to map more precisely which regions that person
      uses when speaking or understanding language. Surgeons will make reference
      to the resulting SPM images before surgery to ensure these critical
      regions will not be excised. Such presurgical planning has been used to
      deliver impact in many neurological disorders including drug-resistant
      epilepsy (as illustrated in case study UCL04-DUN).
    New approaches to drug development in the pharmaceutical industry
    All pharmaceutical companies use medical imaging in the drug development
      process and recent years have seen attempts to develop drugs for many of
      the major health issues today, from depression and dementia to epilepsy
      and schizophrenia. Brain imaging is used here as a `biomarker' &#8212; if drugs
      are effective they will change activity in specific brain regions. The SPM
      software is used to assess whether this change is statistically
      significant.
    A factor in the transfer of SPM technology to industry has been the role
      of two SPM co-authors, Dr Tom Nichols and Dr Andrew Holmes, who have had
      extended periods working in the pharmaceutical industry (at GSK
      and AstraZeneca respectively). Along with the fact that SPM is
      distributed under GPL, this has resulted in SPM being widely used in
      global drug research. Dr Nichols became the Director of Imaging Research
      at GSK's Clinical Imaging Centre that used SPM approaches to measure brain
      activity and structural changes associated with disease and the neural
      effects of pharmacological agents in drug development [d]. Imanova
      Ltd was established as a spin-out imaging provider company in 2011 and now
      owns and manages the renowned Clinical Imaging Centre; this state of the
      art facility was developed by GSK, and has benefitted from &#163;47m of
      investment in equipment and infrastructure since opening in 2007. SPM
      approaches are used routinely throughout Imanova [d].
    SPM's use has now spread to many other companies involved in the drug
      development process. These include other major pharmaceutical companies,
      such as Eli Lilly and consultancies such as Mango Solutions
        [e].
    New software products
    SPM has contributed to the development and use of commercial software
      packages. SPM is built on the commercial programming language `MATLAB'
      developed by MathWorks. SPM is one of MATLAB's core applications [f].
      Each of the thousands of SPM users requires a MATLAB licence to run SPM
      with significant commercial benefit to MathWorks. Several companies have
      developed commercial software products based, in part, on the ideas and
      framework underlying SPM. This includes software installed on all the
      major MRI scanners now sold globally, for instance the inline BOLD imaging
      software of the Siemens MAGNETOM Tim Trio (a commonly sold MRI
      scanner) that provides basic real-time analysis of fMRI data [g].
      Brain Innovation BV has developed BrainVoyager QX based on SPM for
      fMRI, MEG and EEG data analysis [h]. It is now being used by
      approximately 2,000 scientists and clinicians and a single licence is
      currently available for about &#8364;5,000. These developments would not have
      been possible without the SPM framework.
    Creation of new sectors and companies
    The emerging field of neuromarketing, an approach in which Professor Read
      Montague (jointly appointed between Virginia Tech and UCL) was a pioneer,
      proposes that the decisions people make are influenced by subconscious
      brain activity, for example in brain regions dealing with emotional
      responses, and this activity can be accessed using fMRI. SPM is used as
      the basis of such an industry to detect, for example, which sets of
      advertising stimuli produce significantly larger responses in these brain
      regions. This approach has been developed commercially by Neurosense
        [i]. Statistical parametric mapping approaches have also enabled the
      creation of commercial companies that seek to detect deception such as No
      Lie MRI (http://www.noliemri.com),
      and those that support investigators such as Neurometrika [j]. SPM
      has also been used to help provide part of the new evidence base to
      evaluate illegal drugs (as illustrated in case study UCL04-CUR).
    Training of non-academic professionals
    UCL researchers have facilitated the development of a range of short
      courses held over three days that explain SPM's main theoretical concepts,
      and provide hands-on tuition in small groups to academic and non-academic
      end users, which is now delivered across the world. Most of these courses
      are run by universities, but some also by commercial enterprises such as
      Neurometrika, who run several SPM courses primarily in the US but also
      Brazil, Canada and China, for training academic neuroscientists and
      healthcare professionals [j]. UCL run courses every year (two in
      2008, and three per year since then), organised by academics from the
      WTCN. There is one course per year in Zurich, Lausanne, Hamburg, Utrecht
      and Edinburgh organised by local academics but including UCL faculty.
      These courses have ~40 students each and fees vary from &#163;100 to &#163;1,000 [k].
    
ImpactSummary

    Research by Professor Karl Friston at UCL has led to the development of
      Statistical Parametric Mapping (SPM), a statistical framework and software
      package. By providing a way to analyse signals measured from the human
      brain in MRI scanners, SPM triggered the creation of an entirely new field
      of imaging neuroscience. Beneficiaries include: commercial manufacturers
      who provide imaging equipment; healthcare practitioners and patients,
      where SPM is used to deliver new treatments; pharmaceutical industries
      using SPM to deliver clinical trials; the IT industry developing new
      software based on SPM; and entirely new industries such as neuromarketing
      that could only have been created once SPM had been invented.
    
UnderpinningResearch

    Statistical Parametric Mapping (SPM) is both the name of a statistical
      framework for analysing brain images and the name of a software package
      now standard in the field of imaging neuroscience. SPM is used for
      analysing brain imaging data and was originally conceived by Karl Friston
      when working at the MRC Cyclotron Unit at the Hammersmith Hospital in
      1991. The initial application was to data from Positron Emission
      Tomography (PET) and, in the spirit of open science, Friston shared his
      SPM code with colleagues in the nascent brain imaging community. A new era
      began in 1994 when Friston and colleagues opened the Wellcome Trust Centre
      for Neuroimaging (WTCN) at UCL, and re-invented SPM to analyse functional
      Magnetic Resonance Imaging (fMRI) data [1, 4, 5]. At the time
      functional MRI was a new approach to brain imaging and there were no
      principled frameworks in which to analyse the data produced by MRI
      scanners. The underpinning research carried out by Friston provided such a
      framework, together with accompanying software.
    At the heart of SPM is the simple idea of fitting a general linear model
      (GLM) at every location in a time series of functional brain images
      measured using an MRI scanner while a subject lies in it. Parametric
      statistical models are assumed at each location, using the GLM to describe
      the data in terms of experimental and confounding effects, and residual
      variability. Corrections for multiple dependent statistical comparisons
      are then made using Random Field Theory. The output of SPM is an image, or
      a `statistical parametric map', indicating statistically significant
      changes in brain activity. This allows neuroscientists to relate brain
      activity to human behaviour and has led imaging neuroscientists to a
      mapping of the human brain, identifying specific areas for sensory,
      emotional and decision-making processes. Without SPM, there would be no
      principled framework for undertaking such analyses and thus no easy way to
      undertake imaging neuroscience. The underpinning research carried out by
      Friston and colleagues is now the basis for all brain imaging data
      analysis (and all brain imaging software packages) throughout the world.
    In 2000, further research by Friston and Ashburner at UCL significantly
      extended the SPM approach to apply not just to functional brain images but
      also to structural MRI data. This allowed statistical characterisation and
      localisation of differences in grey matter density among or between
      different groups of patients (or healthy humans) using a procedure known
      as Voxel-Based Morphometry (VBM) [2]. Such an approach has now
      been used, for example, to map the loss of grey matter in dementia by
      pharmaceutical companies.
    In 2005, further research by Friston and Penny at UCL permitted the
      extension of the SPM framework and software to the analysis of
      magnetoencephalographic (MEG) and electroencephalographic (EEG) data [6].
      This allows neuroscientists to study brain activity as it evolves on a
      fast time scale, and creates new beneficiaries in this emerging area.
    Finally, research led to additional enhancements to the software to allow
      neuroscientists to study interactions among brain regions using a
      technique called Dynamic Causal Modelling (DCM) [3]. DCM fits
      biologically realistic differential equation models to brain imaging data,
      using Bayesian inference. It allows neuroscientists to detect changes in
      brain pathways, rather than brain regions. It has been used, for example,
      to show that connections from frontal to temporal regions were altered in
      patients in a vegetative state, whereas other pathways remained intact.
    