CaseStudyId: 44238
Title: 
    Development and validation of a biomarker for cytomegalovirus disease
      after transplant improves identification of patients at risk, speed of
      diagnosis and treatment
    

ImpactDetails

    We have developed PCR assays which have been adopted into clinical
      practice to allow rapid diagnosis of CMV viral load, and have been used to
      initiate pre-emptive therapy with anti-viral drugs. In addition, they are
      used to provide a national service for retrospective diagnosis of
      congenital CMV infection. Our work has also influenced the development of
      vaccines by the pharmaceutical industry.
    Development of assays and introduction into clinical practice
    The underpinning research described above has resulted in a new
      understanding of the natural history and pathogenesis of CMV infection,
      which has been applied in multiple ways for patient benefit. Assays were
      developed for rapid quantitative diagnosis and were promptly introduced
      into routine clinical practice by our group. These assays were patented
      and licensed from 2006 by the Health Protection Agency, meaning that CMV
      rapid diagnosis and pre-emptive therapy are now available throughout the
      UK. Between 2008 and 2010 almost 19,000 tests were performed, generating
      royalties to UCL of [text removed for publication] [a].
      Our research on the usefulness of detecting CMV DNA is cited in the latest
      guidelines on managing CMV post-transplantation [b].
    Pre-emptive treatment in transplantation
    Pre-emptive treatment is now widely used with virtually all bone marrow
      transplant patients worldwide. This reduces the risk to the bone marrow
      from anti-CMV drugs [c]. In solid organ transplants, most centres
      still administer prophylactic antivirals to all patients regardless of
      whether they have CMV infection. However the latest guidelines from the
      USA have moved from preferring prophylaxis to equipoise, citing our recent
      results demonstrating the efficacy of pre-emptive therapy [b].
    Diagnosis of congenital CMV infection
    Our PCR assays are used to provide a national service for retrospective
      diagnosis of congenital CMV infection when children present with
      sensorineural hearing loss or developmental delay, as recommended by two
      sets of guidelines issued by the British Association of Audiovestibular
      Physicians in 2009 [d]. Since 2008, 1,455 tests have been
      performed using our method [e].
    Development of CMV vaccines
    Our work has stimulated investment by several pharmaceutical companies in
      prototype CMV vaccines which are currently entering clinical trials.
      Research at UCL has provided much of the scientific basis for its current
      control by means of antiviral therapy and what we hope will be its
      ultimate elimination by means of routine immunisation [f]. At a
      national level, the Department of Health Joint Committee on Vaccination
      and Immunisation invited vaccine manufacturers to submit evidence in 2012
      about their plans for preparing CMV vaccines as part of the committee's
      horizon scanning [g]. At an international level, our findings have
      been presented to the two USA Federal meetings which have reviewed the
      prospects for developing CMV vaccines (CDC/NIH 2000 Atlanta;
      FDA/CDC/NIH/NVPO Washington DC 2012) [h]. We also provided
      evidence to the Decade of Vaccines consortium which produced a Global
      Vaccine Action Plan proposing that, for the future, vaccines should be
      prepared against four virus infections which are currently not
      vaccine-preventable. One of these is CMV and the proposal was endorsed by
      the World Health Assembly in 2012 [i].
    Raising awareness of CMV: public and patient engagement
    In 2012, Griffiths worked with patient support group CMV Action to
      produce a summary of current UK guidelines aimed at parents of children
      with congenital CMV. This document set out key points from the guidelines
      to help families to understand what tests their child will have and why [j].
      Griffiths has also written a book on CMV entitled The Stealth Virus
      which aimed to explain CMV to the non-specialist [k]. This book
      was welcomed by CMV Action and recommended on patient websites [l].
    
ImpactSummary

    Basic and translational research undertaken since 1993 by UCL Virology
      has defined the natural history and pathogenesis of cytomegalovirus (CMV)
      infection and disease. As a consequence of our work, rapid diagnosis and
      pre-emptive therapy are now available worldwide for this important
      infection. We have provided a national reference service for strains of
      CMV resistant to current antiviral drugs and for diagnosis of congenital
      CMV infection.
    
UnderpinningResearch

    Cytomegalovirus (CMV) is a very common virus infecting 60-100% people
      worldwide. In healthy individuals it usually goes unnoticed, but in
      certain immunocompromised groups it can be fatal. It is the most frequent
      cause of intrauterine infection, and causes permanent disability in 1-2
      live births per thousand. It is also the commonest infectious agent to
      affect transplant patients, and is implicated in causing death in other
      at-risk populations, specifically elderly patients and those with HIV
      infection.
    Research at the UCL Department of Virology led by Professor Paul
      Griffiths developed assays to measure CMV DNA in infected humans using
      non-nested polymerase chain reaction (PCR) amplification of the UL55 gene.
      We showed that CMV replicated rapidly in humans (with a doubling time of
      approximately one day) so establishing the schedule of monitoring of CMV
      infection after transplantation [1]. We also used these assays to
      show that measurements of viral load acted as prognostic markers for
      end-organ disease [2, 3]. These studies of natural history of CMV
      infection were extended to other cohorts of patients, where CMV viraemia
      was significantly associated with mortality in AIDS patients [4].
      The work demonstrated the high inherent pathogenicity of CMV, and the role
      of the immune system in controlling infection even in patients who were
      immunocompromised. Our assays of viral replication have been used to
      measure the effectiveness of pre-emptive antiviral therapy, which
      identifies early viral replication after transplantation which then
      triggers antiviral therapy (the alternative is to treat all transplants
      with antiviral drugs regardless of whether they are infected or not). Our
      recent data have generated reassuring outcomes that this approach achieves
      good control of CMV disease after liver and kidney transplantation [5].
    We also proposed that the virus persisted in sanctuary sites within the
      body protected by immune evasion genes that resulted in a sub-optimal
      immune response. We concluded that it would be necessary to improve
      natural immunity to the virus. To do this we conducted a randomised
      controlled trial of a prototype CMV vaccine, showing that vaccination
      provided substantial control of the viral load in patients undergoing
      liver and kidney transplantation [6]. Importantly, natural
      immunity in these immunocompromised hosts was boosted when vaccine was
      given to people with natural infection. The amount of antibody made in
      response to the vaccine correlated with the protection observed indicating
      that humoral immunity is important in patients with impaired cell mediated
      immunity. We also developed new PCR assays to detect CMV DNA in dried
      blood spots obtained routinely at birth and use them to provide a national
      service for retrospective diagnosis of congenital CMV infection when
      children present with sensorineural hearing loss or developmental delay [7].
    