CaseStudyId: 44241
Title: 
    Cell membrane biology in haemolytic anaemias: advances in diagnosis and
      treatment
    

ImpactDetails

    The underpinning research described above has improved the diagnosis of
      the hereditary stomatocytoses, avoiding potentially harmful splenectomies
      in these patients, and inappropriate investigation of artefactual
      hyperkalaemia. This work has thus established a standard of care for this
      patient group.
    Since 2008, Stewart's team have analysed ~500 blood samples from Europe
      and North America, successfully identifying hereditary stomatocytoses in
      17 pedigrees. The impact of this on patient care and management has been
      paramount, facilitating an accurate diagnosis, enabling counselling and
      avoiding splenectomy for at least 30 individuals in the UK. One patient
      described the impact of these findings on her family as follows,
      contrasting those individuals who underwent splenectomy, with those who
      were able to avoid it as a result of Stewart's research:
    "Over the years a number of the family have had their spleens removed
        either here or in Northern Ireland. Our own mother had a splenectomy and
        she died in 2004 with problems which were associated with blood clotting
        and Crohn's Disease. My elder sister has had the most problems including
        a blockage in a vein leading to the liver after her splenectomy and now
        has problems with bleeding from the gullet ... I have an aunt over in
        Northern Ireland who had her spleen removed and she had constant
        problems with her breathing. Those of us who have not had our spleens
        removed (which includes myself and my younger brother) are well with
        little problem or complication from DHS [dehydrated hereditary
        stomatocytosis]. We have another aunt over in Northern Ireland who did
        not have her spleen removed. She had 12 children without any major
        problems. We have anaemia, and we need occasional transfusions (not all
        of us), but none of the breathing problems or other complications which
        other family members have experienced" [a].
    A further impact of accurate diagnosis is the correct understanding of
      high plasma potassium levels. In about half of the cases, high plasma
      potassium levels have been explained on the basis of leaky red cells,
      removing the need for repeated urgent hospital attendances for repeat
      potassium measurements. A patient described the impact on her family as
      follows:
    "High plasma potassium levels... were a bother to us all as, after any
        blood test we would be recalled to hospital as an emergency... One thing
        that has changed our lives is the recognition that our habitually very
        high plasma potassium levels are due to the abnormality in the red cell
        membrane. This new understanding has saved us countless late-night
        hospital visits for urgent repeat potassium measurements" [b].
    This work has been widely cited and included in standard textbooks on
      this subject [c].
    As described above, Stewart's research identified a common single
      nucleotide polymorphism (SNP) in the Caucasian population (`Cardiff' [ref
      7, above]) which causes a milder non-haemolytic anaemia. When blood from
      these individuals is cooled, the effect on the red cells is substantial,
      resulting in major potassium leaks. As blood taken from donors is
      routinely cooled, this raises the potassium in the donated blood from
      these individuals. When administered to patients this risks unexpected and
      potentially harmful true hyperkalaemia and the transfusion of damaged or
      partly lysed red cells, making the transfusion less efficacious. As a
      result of work by Stewart and Bruce, blood from such donors has been
      identified in the existing pool of donated blood at the National Blood
      Transfusion Service (NBTS). In reaction to this finding, the NBTS is now
      in the process of implementing a screening strategy for this polymorphism
      on all donated blood in order to avoid this complication. This will have
      an impact at a national and potentially international level. The work is
      the subject of a current patent application [d].
    Finally, the underpinning research has improved the diagnosis of the rare
      metabolic condition phytosterolaemia (sitosterolaemia), in which
      absorption of both dietary cholesterol and plant sterols is unrestricted.
      This can now be identified quickly by a blood count rather than mass
      spectroscopy of lipids, enabling diagnosis of the condition to take place
      via routine haematology, without expensive mass spectrometry. As a result
      of this work, a number of individuals and families have been identified in
      the UK (five families in Stewart's study, [ref 6, above]), in China [e]
      and in the US [f]. The impact of the correct diagnosis is to
      enable effective treatment of the condition. Patients with the condition
      do not respond to the HMG CoA reductase inhibitors (statins), which are
      currently the mainstay in the treatment of hypercholesterolaemia.
      Individuals instead must be treated with a diet low in cholesterol as well
      as plant sterols including sitosterol. With correct dietary treatment,
      however, cholesterol remains low [g].
    
ImpactSummary

    Research at UCL on human haemolytic anaemias known as the `hereditary
      stomatocytoses' has improved diagnosis of these conditions, meaning that
      patients now avoid unnecessary and potentially life-threatening
      splenectomies, and inappropriate investigation and treatment for raised
      potassium levels. Identification of a common single nucleotide
      polymorphism that causes apparently normal red blood cells to leak salt
      when cooled (as is normal procedure with donated blood) has raised
      awareness of this issue in the NHS Blood and Transfusion service, with the
      result that individuals with this condition have been identified among
      existing donors, and work is underway to develop a screening method to
      exclude such individuals from donating blood that cannot be stored safely.
      Finally, the research has facilitated diagnosis of the recessive metabolic
      disorder phytosterolaemia by blood count, allowing these individuals to be
      given appropriate dietary treatment to control their cholesterol levels.
    
UnderpinningResearch

    The hereditary stomatocytoses are a class of human haemolytic anaemias in
      which the membrane of the red blood cell `leaks' the salt atoms sodium and
      potassium. These `leaky' cells have a tendency to swell and burst in the
      circulation. Research over the last 20 years by Professor Gordon Stewart
      at the UCL Division of Medicine has made novel contributions to the
      molecular understanding of these diseases, resulting in advances in
      diagnosis and clinical management.
    Prior to work by Stewart, patients with stomatocytosis were commonly
      diagnosed with a related condition, hereditary spherocytosis. Stewart
      identified that a crucial feature in diagnosis is the dependence of the
      increased sodium-potassium permeability as temperature falls. This
      discovery allowed the clear distinction of a series of phenotypic variants
      and discriminated each of these variants from hereditary spherocytosis [1].
      In that condition, removal of the spleen is beneficial; Stewart was the
      first to demonstrate that splenectomised patients with hereditary
      stomatocytosis, however, have an increased risk of venous thromboembolism
      (deep vein thrombosis, DVT), with potentially fatal embolism of clot to
      the lungs [2].
    The research also demonstrated that many of these patients were also
      being misdiagnosed with hyperkalaemia (high plasma potassium). True
      hyperkalaemia is a medical emergency, but in these patients the plasma
      potassium was normal in vivo. The high measured potassium was an artefact
      of blood sample processing. If a freshly taken blood sample was allowed to
      cool towards room temperature prior to separation of red cells from plasma
      during routine blood sampling, potassium leaked from the red cells and
      gave rise to factitious or `pseudohyperkalaemia'. These patients were at
      risk of inappropriate referral to hospital and erroneous emergency
      treatment for the raised potassium.
    In collaboration with Dr Lesley Bruce (NHS Blood and Transplant) Stewart
      showed that these diseases can be caused by mutations in at least three
      different genes: SLC4A1, coding for the band 3 anion exchanger [1];
      RhAG, coding for the so-called rhesus-associated glycoprotein, a
      gas channel [3]; and SLC2A1, coding for the GLUT1
      facilitative glucose transporter [4]. Salt-leaky mutations in
      GLUT1 cause recognisable haematological-neurological-ophthalmological
      syndrome [5].
    In the course of this work, Stewart (in collaboration with Dr David Rees,
      King's College London) also showed that the rare hypercholesterolaemic
      metabolic condition phytosterolaemia can readily and inexpensively be
      diagnosed via a specific haematological presentation [6]. This is
      an important diagnosis, because the condition does not respond to statins,
      the mainstay of treatment of raised cholesterol.
    Among the many families studied by Stewart, that found in Cardiff [7]
      is emerging as important. That family's asymptomatic non-haemolytic
      condition is caused by a gene change that is already recognised as a
      single nucleotide polymorphism, present at a frequency of 0.1% in the
      caucasian population. Red cells from affected donors show a major salt
      leak at refrigerator temperatures only, and the cells are unsuitable for
      storage in blood transfusion, as the blood is likely to cause true
      hyperkalaemia when administered to a recipient.
    