CaseStudyId: 44281
Title: 
    Inherited retinal disease: genetic testing and a new era of therapy
    

ImpactDetails

    Inherited retinal degenerations
    The inherited retinal dystrophies affect about 1 in 3,000 individuals and
      include retinitis pigmentosa
      and cone-rod dystrophies. These disorders are caused by mutations in a
      very large number of
      genes. There are some non-progressive conditions but the majority progress
      relentlessly with
      currently no effective therapy. The personal and societal impact of what
      in many instances is life-
      long visual impairment is substantial.
    The research described above has made a substantial contribution to the
      overall body of
      knowledge of the genetics of eye disease and how that impacts on the lives
      of patients. Although
      our ability to treat is, as yet, limited, there are very real benefits to
      accurate genetic testing and
      associated counselling. As outlined in guidelines from the American
      Academy of Ophthalmology on
      genetic testing of inherited eye disease, "Genetic testing can make a
        very positive impact on
        individuals and families affected with inherited eye disease in a number
        of ways. When properly
        performed, interpreted, and acted on, genetic tests can improve the
        accuracy of diagnoses and
        prognoses, can improve the accuracy of genetic counseling, can reduce
        the risk of disease
        occurrence or recurrence in families at risk, and can facilitate the
        development and delivery of
        mechanism-specific care" [a]. Guidelines such as this all
      support the benefits of genetic testing for
      patients thought to have eye disease inherited in a broadly Mendelian
      fashion. It is important to
      note that the underpinning research cited above has also defined important
      phenotypical
      characteristics of these diseases, both in terms of appearances of the
      back of the eye and
      electrophysiology. All of this comes together to improve diagnostic
      accuracy for patients. This in
      turn leads to improved genetic counselling (including prenatal and
      pre-implantation diagnosis) and
      better information about long-term prognosis. This is only possible when
      the genetic cause of
      disease in an individual patient is known. Our research has identified a
      large number of genes that
      are associated with inherited retinal disease and has made such clinical
      advances possible.
    Laboratories around the world now offer genetic testing for eye disease.
      For example, the US
      National Eye Institute created the eyeGENE Network to provide US patients
      with access to genetic
      testing for eye disease. Many of the tests offered include genes
      identified through our research [b].
      In the UK, tests for genes we identified are offered by (among others)
      Asper Biotech, the North
      West Regional Genetics Service, Manchester and the Yorkshire Regional
      Genetics Service, Leeds
      [c]. From 2008-13 just at Moorfields, 4,952 patients have had
      genetic testing and counselling. A
      study we conducted in 2013 confirmed the overall benefits of genetic
      testing for retinal disease [d].
    AMD Testing
    Age-related macular degeneration (AMD) is the commonest cause of
      blindness registration in the
      UK and presents an escalating burden given the expanding elderly
      population in western societies.
      The C3 polymorphism we identified (ref [6] above) is currently used in
      diagnostic tests marketed by
      Arctic Dx and Sequenom [e]. The value of this polymorphism is
      indicated by a recent US challenge
      concerning its use for diagnostic purposes (Patent Interference No
      105,897) [f]. The recent report
      that inhibition of the complement pathway may alter the rate of
      progression of geographic atrophy,
      one of the blinding manifestations of AMD, makes the importance of testing
      of the genetics of the
      complement pathway even more important, as it may be amenable to
      therapeutic intervention.
    Gene Therapy
    Our fundamental studies of gene therapy have led to the first gene
      therapy treatment of patients
      with retinal degeneration. Our studies, and those of other groups in the
      USA, are showing that this
      approach can bring benefit and, although the number of patients treated to
      date is small, the hope
      that these advances have brought is colossal. The then Minister of State
      for Public Health
      described the trial as: "a major achievement for British science and
        the NHS [which] shows we
        truly are at the forefront of innovation" [g]. We have
      established a new era of therapeutics, not only
      for inherited eye disease but also for acquired conditions. These
      initiatives have also brought
      investment into the UK through our partnership with Targeted Genetics
      Corporation (Seattle). The
      transformational studies have captured the imagination of the scientific
      community, the media and
      politicians alike. The substantial coverage our trial received has helped
      build the UK's reputation
      for gene therapy and our collaborator Oxford Biomedica has recently
      embarked on a major
      programme of ophthalmic gene therapy following substantial investment from
      Sanofi [h].
      Genzyme, using similar technology to that used in our early studies, are
      currently running a trial of
      gene therapy for age-related macular degeneration [i].
    
ImpactSummary

    Research at the UCL Institute of Ophthalmology over the last 20 years has
      resulted in the
      identification of a large number of novel genes that cause inherited
      retinal disease. These genes
      have been incorporated into diagnostic tests, which have allowed molecular
      diagnosis, improved
      genetic counselling including pre-natal/pre-implantation diagnosis, better
      information about
      prognosis and have informed decisions about which diseases should be
      prioritised for clinical trials
      of novel treatments. The identification of these genes has greatly
      improved understanding of
      disease mechanisms, an essential prerequisite for developing new treatment
      approaches such as
      gene therapy.
    
UnderpinningResearch

    A remarkable number of mutations in ocular genes lead to blinding disease
      and the retina is
      particularly notable in this regard. In retinitis pigmentosa, rods are
      primarily affected and secondary
      loss of central cones leads to severe visual impairment. In other
      degenerations, the cones are
      primarily affected. Many of these conditions have an early age of onset
      and lead to life-long visual
      loss.
    Professor Shomi Bhattacharya laid the foundation of ophthalmic genetics
      with the mapping of X-
      linked retinitis pigmentosa and since then he, his group, UCL colleagues
      (Professors Hardcastle,
      Moore and Webster) and collaborators have identified more genes that cause
      eye disease than
      any other centre in the world. The huge patient base at Moorfields Eye
      Hospital and the Hospital's
      role as a national referral centre for inherited eye disease, together
      with an extraordinary body of
      work defining the pedigrees of thousands of families (including 30,000
      individuals) have come
      together to make this achievement possible. Professor Alan Bird was the
      early clinical lead in this
      work and more recently Professors Tony Moore and Andrew Webster and Mr
      Michel Michaelides
      have taken over responsibility for phenotyping and managing these
      patients. An internationally
      renowned electrodiagnostics department led by Professor Graham Holder has
      assisted in
      functional phenotyping. Electrophysiology has contributed insights into
      both the cellular location of
      the genetic defect(s) and pathogenesis.
    In 1997, three labs simultaneously identified CRX, a novel homeobox gene,
      as a cause of cone-rod
      dystrophy [1]. Other disease-causing genes identified include NRL
      (1998) [2] PRPF31 (2001) [3]
      TOPORS (2007) [4] and OPA1 (2000) [5]. In 2008, a study
      described EYS, a major gene for
      autosomal recessive retinitis pigmentosa accounting for 10-15% of cases
      world-wide [6]. The UCL
      team has itself or in combination with other groups contributed to the
      identification of 20 other
      genes causing inherited retinal disease.
    While the focus has been on monogenic disorders we have also made a major
      contribution to the
      international effort to identify the genetic variants that are associated
      with an increased risk of age-
      related macular degeneration (AMD). We, in collaboration with Cambridge
      University, were the first
      to identify a polymorphism in C3 as one of the major genetic variants
      predisposing to AMD [7] and
      we have been a major collaborator in an international consortium that has
      identified further AMD
      genes.
    Flowing from this discovery we have run two interlocking strands of
      research. First, we have
      advanced our understanding of pathogenesis with extensive programmes
      involving in vitro and
      animal model studies. Second, having identified in the mid 1990s the
      potential for gene therapy we
      have, under Professor Robin Ali's leadership, developed the technology for
      gene therapy of eye
      disease. This has led to the first demonstration that gene therapy can
      improve retinal function in
      human inherited retinal disease [8].
    