CaseStudyId: 44315
Title: 
    Child Trust Fund: the study that helped to deliver baby bonds
    

ImpactDetails

    Beneficiaries and dates of benefit: The six million UK children
      with Child Trust Fund accounts are its main beneficiaries. Between 2020
      and 2029 they will gain access to funds that had already amounted to &#163;4.8
      bn by May 20132. Arguably, parents also benefit as they can
        currently (from April 6, 2013) put up to &#163;3,720 of tax-free savings into
        these accounts on their children's behalf. Under the original scheme all
        children born on or after September 1, 2002 received a voucher which
        their parents could use to start a savings account that their child
        could not touch until the age of 18. All families initially received a
        &#163;250 voucher, while children from low-income households qualified for an
        extra &#163;250. The Labour government later decided to pay another &#163;250 into
        fund accounts at age 7 (this applied between September 1, 2009 and July
        31, 2010). Those in low-income families got a further &#163;250 at age 7. The
        scheme was closed to children who were born after January 2, 2011.
    Reach and significance: Bynner and Despotidou's findings helped to
      persuade Labour ministers to proceed with the trust fund scheme. This
      initiative was included in Labour's 2001 election manifesto and was
      eventually launched in January 2005. The IOE research influenced the
      politicians and policy advisers who initiated the scheme. It has also
      helped to shape policy thinking on asset-based welfare in other countries.
      As the following evidence demonstrates, the study has had two important
      types of impact which can be categorised3 as `instrumental'
        (influencing policy and/or practice) and `conceptual' (enhancing general
        understanding and informing debate).
    Instrumental impact:
      Bynner discussed his findings with government policy advisers at a No. 10
      Strategy Unit meeting in early 2000. Gavin Kelly, of the IPPR, the
      policy's principal architect, attended this meeting, as did key advisers
      from the Prime Minister's Office. Bynner also gave a presentation on his
      research to the Savings and Assets for All seminar held at 11 Downing
      Street on July 18, 2001.
    Influence on Gavin Kelly: Ten years later Kelly reflected
      on the importance of the IOE research in persuading the government to
      launch `baby bonds' in a BBC Radio 4 interview with Guardian
      journalist Polly Toynbee in September 2011 mdash; see impact source S1.
      "It was a rather idealistic notion in some ways, that Britain would be
        a very different and better country if every young person grew up
        knowing that when they come of age that they would have something behind
        them to let them get a decent start in life. We also did it though
        because we had hard, hard evidence that this intuition actually was
        real. We did a big study with the Institute of Education looking at what
        happened to those young adults who started off in life with a small
        capital sum, a pot of assets if you like, at their disposal compared to
        those who didn't ... It was a very powerful effect and one which was
        much more powerful than frankly we had expected to find and so we were
        driven on by that finding &#8212; and by what we saw happening more generally
        in terms of asset inequality".
    Impact on ministers' thinking: Six years earlier, in
      another Radio 4 interview (S2), David Blunkett, the former
      Education Secretary, had also confirmed that the research had a
      significant impact on government thinking. "We were absolutely
        staggered by the difference that having some assets, some stake, made to
        individuals, not just in terms of that start in life as adults at the
        age of 18 but throughout life, a difference obviously in terms of
        security and stability, but also actually their willingness to engage
        with life. That stake transforms not only their interest in themselves,
        in employment, in education but aspiration for their children, a
        willingness to participate in wider community events, all those things
        materially affected by whether someone has a stake, and it doesn't have
        to be a massive stake". David Blunkett also testified to the
      importance of the IOE research in helping to shape the scheme in a 2003
      lecture (S3) in which he expanded on his thinking about asset-based
      welfare.
    Green Paper: The impact of the research on government
      thinking had, however, been acknowledged as early as 2001 &#8212; in Savings
        and assets for all (S4), a Green Paper which sought agreement
      on the broad principles behind the scheme. This document referred to the
      IOE study and said: "... this powerful new evidence suggests that having
      access to at least limited financial assets can have a marked impact on
      people's economic and social wellbeing".
    Conceptual impact:
      Social mobility report: John Bynner's findings have also
      been cited in high-profile policy documents such as Unleashing
        aspiration, the 2009 report of the panel on fair access to the
      professions chaired by Alan Milburn MP, who subsequently became the
      coalition Government's `social mobility tsar'. His report notes: "There
        is good evidence, for example, that access to moderate amounts of
        financial capital at an early age can have major impacts on later life
        outcomes: a small amount of capital (between &#163;300 and &#163;600) at age 23 is
        associated with better outcomes later in life" (S5).
    Overseas influence: Policy-makers and think tanks from
      countries including the USA, France, Germany, New Zealand and Brazil have
      shown interest in learning from the UK's baby bonds `experience'. Some of
      the documents that have emerged from their deliberations refer to the
      findings of the IOE study (S6). The New America Foundation
      referred to the IOE research in its testimony to a US Senate sub-committee
      that investigated ways of building assets for low income families in 2005.
      The Foundation reported that: "... work in the United Kingdom ...
        found a `persistent effect of assets on a number of outcomes, which were
        impervious to a wide range of controls', and `the assets-effect was
        sustained, with employment, psychological health, belief in the
        political system and values, all appearing to be enhanced by assets'."
      (S7). The same statement appeared in the first major Canadian book
      on asset-based policy (S8). The IOE research is also referred to
      in reports on assets-based policies prepared for international bodies such
      as the World Bank (S9), the European Commission (S10) and
      the Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development.
    
ImpactSummary

    This case study focuses on IOE research that played a pivotal role in the
      establishment of the last Labour government's Child Trust Fund, the
      world's first universal children's savings scheme. The fund benefits UK
      children born between 2002 and 2011. Its designers aimed to ensure that
      every young person had some savings at age 18. The scheme was scrapped by
      the coalition government in January 2011 and replaced with Junior ISAs.
      However, it has left a very substantial legacy &#8212; in the form of nest eggs
      for six million children that will hatch when they reach their 18th
      birthday. Between 2020 and 2029, they will gain access to funds that had
      already amounted to &#163;4.8 billion by May 20131.
    
UnderpinningResearch

    Context: Thomas Paine, author of The Rights of Man,
      proposed what can be seen as the original forerunner of the Child Trust
      Fund. In Agrarian Justice, a pamphlet published in 1797, he called
      for a national fund, provided through inheritance tax, which would pay &#163;15
      to every 21-year-old in England. Two hundred years later, in 1989, Julian
      Le Grand of the London School of Economics revived the idea. He summed up
      his proposal in one sentence: "You take the wealth of one generation, use
      it to fertilise the wealth of the next". Just over 13 years ago the
      Institute for Public Policy Research (IPPR) developed a related model that
      was more politically palatable &#8212; `baby bonds' that the government would
      give to each child at birth. The thinking behind this scheme came partly
      from the United States where Michael Sherraden, of the University of
      Michigan, had been advocating `asset-based welfare'. His argument was that
      the poor can build significant assets with the right jump start. It was
      then evidence supplied by Professor John Bynner and research officer Sofia
      Despotidou of the IOE that helped to convince the Blair government that
      they should establish the Child Trust Fund scheme. At the time of the
      research, Bynner was director of the Centre for Longitudinal Studies at
      the IOE. He is now an Emeritus Professor of Social Sciences in Education
      at the IOE.
    Key findings: Bynner and Despotidou discovered that having even
      very modest savings at age 23 had a very wide range of beneficial
      economic, social and health effects 10 years later &#8212; see references R1
      &amp; R2. Perhaps unsurprisingly, the study also found that people
      with savings seemed to be happier than those with no assets.
    Threshold sum: Another key finding was, however, much less
      predictable. The researchers had thought that the more savings a young
      adult had, the stronger the asset effect would be, in other words, the
      more likely they were to be happy, and the less likely they were to be
      unemployed. Instead, they found that what seemed to matter most was that a
      person had modest savings at age 23 (&#163;200 in 1981 &#8212; the equivalent of
      about &#163;600 today). The amount of savings that men held above the &#163;200
      threshold appeared to have no bearing on the likelihood of being
      unemployed. There was a similar, though weaker, association between
      women's savings at 23 and unemployment at 33.
    Health: Men's health was also positively associated with
      savings but there appeared to be no savings effect on women's health once
      other factors were considered. There also seemed to be an association
      between depression and savings, and approximate thresholds for men and
      women could again be identified.
    Marriage and attitudes: Men and women with savings at 23
      were less likely to experience marital breakdown by 33. Those with savings
      were also most likely to be anti-racist and to trust the political system.
    Psychological benefits: The researchers concluded that
      savings appear to protect against poor mental wellbeing. The amount of
      savings, once a threshold has been reached, does not seem to matter. This
      suggests that the benefit of savings may be as much psychological as
      economic. It is possible that having savings during the early twenties
      provides a degree of confidence, and feeling of self-worth, that underpins
      some of the effects identified. Conversely, being in debt at this age has
      negative effects on a person's wellbeing. This is perhaps the study's most
      important result.
    Research methods: Bynner and Despotidou analysed data on 11,400
      young adults taking part in the National Child Development Study (NCDS),
      which is following a cohort of British people born in one week in March
      1958. At the time of their research (1999-2000) the cohort had been
      surveyed at birth, and ages 7, 11, 16, 23 and 33. The research related
      information on savings, any investments or inheritance (over &#163;500) &#8212;
      collected during the age 23 interview &#8212; to outcomes at 33.
    First stage: The researchers examined the individual impacts of
      different types of assets &#8212; savings, investments and inheritance (the
      multivariate statistical technique of Ordinary Least Squares regression
      was used). More than four in five cohort members (82%) had savings at age
      23, whereas only just over one in ten had investments (11%) or an
      inheritance (12%). Although investments and inheritance had evident
      effects, they were not as impressive as the savings effects. The
      researchers therefore focused particularly on savings.
    Second stage: They then considered other outcomes that could
      conceivably be affected by savings, and the amount needed for a positive
      effect to be observed.
    Third stage: Finally, the researchers reverted to examining the
      effects of savings and investments separately, again attempting to ensure
      that the apparent asset effect was not masking a more fundamental cause,
      such as social class.
    