CaseStudyId: 44317
Title: 
    The Effective Pre-School, Primary and Secondary Education (EPPSE)
        project: A better start for children
    

ImpactDetails

    Dates of impact: Impacts between 2008 and 2013 extend the
      reputation and influence earned in
      earlier phases of the study. A high point is the extension of free
      pre-school provision to all three- and four-year-olds in 2010.
    Principal beneficiaries: Children aged 2-5 through universally
      delivered and targeted pre-school
      provision (for children needing extra help &#8212; some 20% of the child
      population, i.e. about 130,000
      youngsters a year); practitioners in early years settings; local and
      national policy-makers in the UK
      and abroad.
    Reach and significance: EPPSE changed thinking and practice
      relating to pre-school entitlement,
      pedagogy, curriculum and teacher education. Citations by international
      NGOs such as UNICEF
      and UNESCO attest to its global reach. The project improved the prospects
      of generations of
      children by highlighting the home and educational factors that make a
      difference to child outcomes,
      especially for disadvantaged children. EPPSE can therefore point to high
      levels of instrumental
      impact2 (influencing policy and/or practice), conceptual impact
        (enhancing general understanding
        and informing debate) and capacity building, as evidenced below.
    Instrumental impact: Policy: EPPSE has influenced many major
      policy decisions affecting young
      children (R4). Since 2008 it has been referred to in seven
      Parliamentary debates or supporting
      evidence, six DfE Research Strategies, five National Childcare Strategies,
      19 major Policy
      Reviews and four UNESCO/UNICEF reports. The researchers have advised
      Ministers and civil
      servants including those from the National Audit Office (NAO), HM Treasury
      (HMT) and
      Department for Education (DfE), and Parliamentary select committees.
      Findings have been used
      by local authorities across the UK and all four UK national governments.
      EPPSE reports are
      consistently in the top 10 downloads on the DfE publications website.
    Pre-school: EPPSE findings have underpinned all HM Treasury
      Comprehensive Spending
      Reviews and National Childcare Strategies since 2000. The most significant
      impact has been
      derived from reporting the benefits of high quality pre-school, which led
      to free provision for all 3
      and 4-year-olds, starting in 2010.
    
      The NAO (2012, p 13, S1) used EPPSE to justify increasing
        investment in early years.
      The Government's More Great Childcare cites EPPSE findings on
        `what works' in raising
        quality (2013, p 15, S2) in the context of a &#163;5 billion-a-year
        expenditure in early education
        through 525,000 additional childcare places, cumulatively benefitting
        1.1 million children
        since 2004, in addition to 2,599 new Children's Centres, 1,279 new
        Neighbourhood
        Nurseries (realised in 2010), tax credits and employer supported
        childcare. The document
        sets out a new 10-year childcare plan and uses the EPPSE evidence as a
        building block.
      EPPSE evidence underpins the decision in 2010 to extend free
        entitlement to the poorest
        40% (some 260,000) of two-year-olds in 2014 (S3).
    
    Social justice, Success Against the Odds and the Home Learning
          Environment: Many recent major
      policy reviews on poverty and life chances (e.g. Field, S4 and
      Allen, S5) have used EPPSE
      evidence to promote policies to improve the prospects of disadvantaged
      children through early
      interventions. Field quotes the now epigrammatic EPPSE finding that "What
      parents do is more
      important than who parents are". The Government cites EPPSE evidence (R1)
      in its response (S7
      p 62) to these reviews.
    Instrumental impact: Practice: EPPSE findings have been used
      extensively to support
      developments in initial teacher and practitioner training, especially in
      maths and literacy. Edexcel in
      its A2 Psychology textbook (2009) uses EPPSE to demonstrate how research
      is applied to the real
      world. The most significant impact has been on the early years curriculum,
      pedagogy and the
      development of the workforce.
    Pre-school quality: EPPSE clearly identifies aspects of
      pre-school quality that relate to child
      outcomes leading to profound impacts on practice. The ECERS-E scale,
      developed by EPPSE PIs
      at the IOE (R5), is used for quality assurance by approximately 70
      English LAs, evidenced by the
      National ECERS network. Field's 2010 Government-commissioned report (S4)
      on child poverty
      recommends its national implementation and the NAO (2012, p 32, S1)
      reported the scales were
      the third most useful measure used by LAs to assess quality, with 92% of
      LAs finding it very or
      fairly useful. ECERS-E is also used by countless pre-schools for
      self-assessment and CPD. More
      than 1,000 UK teachers have been trained in its use. Practitioner forums
      discuss the scale's utility
      and sales have exceeded 25,000 copies since 2008. It has been translated
      into many languages.
      Advisers to the US Government (Snow and Van Hemel) explored the use of the
      ECERS-E in their
      2008 report: Early Childhood Assessment: Why, What, and How?
    Effective early years curriculum and pedagogy: The EPPSE
      case studies of `effective' pre-schools
      have had an extensive impact on practice. Findings underpinned the
      original Early Years
      Foundation Stage (EYFS, 2008) and its revision in 2012 (R2, R3).
      Tickell's independent review of
      the EYFS (S7) discussed the role of the family and references
      EPPSE: "Good quality early years
      provision has the next largest impact on children's development by the age
      of 5. The evidence
      strongly shows that this is particularly important for disadvantaged
      children... this good practice
      must continue". When the Government announced the expansion of Teach First
      into the early
      years EPPSE was the only research cited in the press release. Many
      practices identified by
      EPPSE are now taken for granted as `best practice' in the UK and abroad.
      The term `sustained
      shared thinking' (SST), identified in the EPPSE case studies, is now part
      of the everyday language
      of early pedagogy. An Amazon search in June, 2013 reveals 179 books
      containing the phrase (up
      from 21 in 2008), including National Vocational Qualification (NVQ)
      revision guides, training
      materials for EY practitioners, EYFS guidance and advanced textbooks.
      Materials to support SST
      have been developed by organisations such as Early Education, Montessori,
      TES online and the
      British Association for Early Childhood Education.
    Improving the workforce: Findings about staff
      qualifications and quality have been used extensively
      to improve the quality of the workforce. HMT cites EPPSE evidence in
      justifying the &#163;125m
      Transformation Fund that sought to "ensure that all full daycare settings
      are led by a graduate
      qualified early years professional ... and there will be a single
      qualification framework and greater
      opportunities for existing workers to increase their skills". The
      independent Nutbrown review (2012
      S8) on qualifications made extensive reference to EPPSE to justify
      changes to the current
      qualification framework. Evidence from EPPSE was also used in 2013 by the
      Deputy Prime
      Minister and early years organisations to counter Ministerial proposals to
      alter adult-child ratios in
      early childhood provision. EPPSE has also influenced CPD. EPPSE has the
      most downloaded
      research web pages on the IOE website, the DFE has produced five `Research
      Bites' on EPPSE
      circulated to primary schools in England, and CUREE's evidence-informed
      information for teachers
      also cites EPPSE.
    Conceptual impact: EPPSE has raised the nation's awareness and
      understanding of the
      importance of early years education. The research has regular press
      coverage in national and
      professional journals and the broadcast media, and its findings form an
      essential part of the debate
      about home (S9) and pre-school effects.
    International impact: The international reach is exemplified in
      UNESCO (2008): The contribution
        of early childhood education to a sustainable society (S10),
      Australia's first national Early Years
      Learning Framework (2009 S11) and Brazil's national guidelines for
      early years education
      published in 2006 which led to national reforms from 2008 onwards (S12).
      The IOE's PIs are in
      demand globally as experts on early childhood; they have advised
      Ministers, practitioners and
      academics in many countries including Australia, Eire, South Korea, China
      and Brazil.
    
ImpactSummary

    EPPSE is a Government-funded, high profile, longitudinal study with a
      multi-disciplinary design and
      numerous outputs, almost unprecedented in the UK in terms of its scale and
      scope. It has become
      a seminal study of the influence of early education on children's later
      development. Findings have
      been used in the UK and internationally for:
    
      national policy and spending &#8212; the expansion of pre-school provision
        and supporting families,
        especially the disadvantaged;
      curriculum design &#8212; National Curriculum and early childhood education
        guidelines;
      service delivery &#8212; audits of the quality of pre-school;
      professional practice &#8212; enhancing practitioners' understanding of
        `effective' pedagogy;
      social equity &#8212; national and international programmes concerning
        social justice.
    
    The two Principal Investigators at the IOE have taken lead roles in all
      of the above.
    
UnderpinningResearch

    Programme: The team &#8212; IOE: Professor Iram Siraj-Blatchford, Brenda
      Taggart (PIs) and the
      analyses team. University of Oxford: Professor Kathy Sylva, (IOE
      1990-1996), Professor Pam
      Sammons (IOE 1993-2005) and Professor Edward Melhuish (Birkbeck).
    Context: EPPSE was funded in 1997 following concerns about
      children's `school readiness' at age
      5 and what influences their subsequent progress and development. EPPSE
      represents a major
      investment in research by the Department for Education (DfE). Initially
      begun as a study of pre-schooling
	  it has, through large extensions and sub-studies, morphed into a
      major and broader
      programme of research. In addition to studying pre-school, schools and
      families, EPPSE has
      examined effective pedagogical practices, phase transitions, the impact of
      multiple disadvantage
      and how children `succeed against these odds'.
    Methodology: EPPSE is an innovative, large-scale mixed-method
      programme of research.
      Researchers monitored more than 3,000 children from age three to their
      post-16 destinations,
      exploring what influences their academic and social-behavioural
      development. Performance,
      attitudinal and administrative data plus a vast amount of information from
      parents/carers, pre-school
	  workers and teachers were used to create individual child
      trajectories. Multilevel analysis
      was used to isolate the independent variables significant in explaining
      variations in outcomes,
      adopting an 'educational effectiveness' methodology that sees children
      nested in families and
      schools. Intensive case studies/classroom observations and interviews were
      used to unpack
      `effective' practices in primary and pre-schools.
    Key findings:
      Pre-school: The first robust evidence in the UK of the
      positive and enduring (till age 14) benefits of
      high quality pre-school that can ameliorate some effects of social
      disadvantage. EPPSE identified
      the relationships between structural (e.g. staff qualifications) and
      process (e.g. adult/child
      interactions) characteristics that make a difference to child outcomes.
      Using the Early Childhood
      Environment Rating Scale-Extension (ECERS-E, see reference R6), an
      observation scale
      developed by EPPSE, and case study information, the research described
      high quality and
      highlighted specific practices prevalent in effective settings.
    Child and family factors: The first UK study to compare the
      influence of different background
      characteristics on children's development. Findings highlighted the
      importance of the early years
      home learning environment separate from other family factors such as
      mother's qualifications,
      social class etc., all of which play an important part in a child's
      success. It has uniquely studied
      children who `succeed against the odds' (R1), and the role of
      children's peers, families, schools
      and the wider community in tackling disadvantage and under-achievement.
      Children who
      succeeded against the odds had families that `actively cultivated' their
      children and teachers who
      were sensitive in providing additional support when needed.
    