CaseStudyId: 44313
Title: 
    Africa's girls: promoting equality and empowerment
    

ImpactDetails

    Principal beneficiaries and dates: Girls in the six African
      countries that the IOE researchers have
      worked in are the main beneficiaries. The benefits have been accruing
      since 2008.
      Reach and significance: The countries that the researchers have
      been operating in cover an area
      almost 20 times as big as the UK and have an estimated school-age
      population of just over 100
      million 1. Each study has worked directly with several thousand
        girls and the projects have had a
        demonstrable impact (see below) on national &#8212; as well as local &#8212; policy
        and practice in these
        countries. The research is helping to shape international policies aimed
        at improving girls'
        educational and life chances. It has also influenced Westminster MPs'
        thinking on a) how to
        combat gender violence and b) what the post-2015 Millennium Development
        Goals should be. All
        three studies have achieved significant instrumental impacts 2
          (i.e. influencing the development of
          policy or practice). They have also had important capacity-building
          impacts.
    Paths to impact: Local promotion of their findings by the SVAGS
      and TEGINT teams, supported
      by IOE staff, proved to be a valuable way of influencing politicians and
      community leaders.
      GEGPRI incorporated report-back sessions with participants at each
      research site, allowing them
      to reflect on findings with researchers. The findings were then fed into
      influential reports, including
      a special issue of The Lancet (see impact source S1).
    Study 1:SVAGS &#8212; Sexual violence by Kenyan teachers:
      Following the IOE team's
      recommendations on codes of conduct for teachers, SVAGS encouraged the
      drafting of a
      Teachers' Service Commission (TSC) circular on sexual violence, issued by
      the Ministry of
      Education and the TSC. The Kenya National Union of Teachers helped to
      draft the circular and has
      declared that it will not protect teachers guilty of sex offences. The
      circular aims to ensure that
      offenders are not simply transferred to other schools. Awareness of the
      circular was guaranteed by
      a simple strategy: attaching it to teachers' pay slips. A database to
      track teachers with sex offence
      records has also been set up. Sanitation: The IOE's
      findings on the number of girls missing five
      days' schooling a month when menstruating triggered a media campaign for
      national funds to
      provide sanitary pads for schoolgirls. This achieved a remarkable result
      when the Kenyan
      government agreed to set aside US$3.7 million (&#163;2.3m) for this purpose
      from June 2011 (S2 &amp; S3).
      Police initiatives in Ghana: The finding that child
      protection systems were inadequate resulted in
      the project building new links between the Education Service and the
      Police Service. Police in the
      project area have since worked more closely with schools and communities,
      raising awareness of
      appropriate responses to violent acts and encouraging girls to feel more
      confident about reporting
      these crimes. This model is now being copied in the nine other regions of
      Ghana. School clubs in
          Mozambique: The baseline study underscoring the importance of
      school clubs &#8212; coupled with a
      petition from a project school &#8212; drew a rapid response from the Minister
      of Girls' Education.
      Officials were directed to create space in schools for pupils to discuss
      issues such as violence,
      gender and HIV/AIDS. The government later said that by 2014 every school
      in Mozambique should
      have a club. University teaching: Eduardo Mondlane
      University, Mozambique, adopted teaching
      approaches based on the participatory pedagogies used in workshops run by
      Parkes and Heslop
      (S4). The SVAGS baseline report is on the reading list of the MA
      course on Education and
      Development at the University of East Anglia. Commons invitation:
      The SVAGS study led to
      Parkes being invited to make a written submission to the House of Commons
      International
      Development Committee inquiry into violence against women and girls in
      2013. The evidence she
      submitted with Heslop &#8212; highlighting the pivotal role of educational
      institutions &#8212; generated one of
      the few references to education in the resulting report (S5). This
      document summarises their
      proposals and comments: "More detailed analysis and guidance is required
      on how [DFID]
      programmes ... can best address violence against women and girls ...This
      expertise exists, as the
      excellent evidence we received attests, and must be used".
    Study 2: TEGINT &#8212; Girls' clubs: Following IOE
      recommendations about the importance of building
      up girls' clubs, all but two of Tanzania's TEGINT schools have established
      clubs. Their 2,400
      members have participated in children's bunges (parliament
      sessions), barazas (debates), and
      other activities affirming girls' right to education. In Nigeria, girls'
      clubs have been set up in every
      one of the 72 TEGINT schools. In 2010-11, more than 5,100 Nigerian girls
      took part in debates and
      other school activities highlighting gender equality. All girls' clubs in
      both countries are led by a
      mentor &#8212; usually a female teacher trained in promoting girls' rights,
      gender-sensitive teaching
      approaches, and sexual and reproductive health. These mentors were
      appointed after the IOE
      researchers recommended that strong female role models were needed. In
      Nigeria, 24 girls and six
      female teachers from across all states led the development of the Girls'
        Club Manual, containing
      guidelines for establishing and running these clubs. This manual is now
      being used throughout Nigeria. Girls' empowerment: The TEGINT endline studies
      showed that, in the project areas in
      Tanzania and Nigeria, girls who had joined clubs were more aware of their
      rights than non-club
      members and were more likely to challenge discrimination and violence (as
      measured by a girls'
      empowerment index that the IOE developed for the project). Reducing
          absenteeism: Mapping out-
      of-school girls is reducing absenteeism in Nigeria. Almost 1,600
      out-of-school girls were identified
      in TEGINT districts in 2011 through termly mapping and outreach work led
      by girls' club members.
      Girls and mentors co-ordinated home visits and sought school or local
      government backing to
      encourage parents to bring girls back to school. Books or uniforms were
      sometimes offered as
      inducements. Hundreds of girls subsequently returned to school. Local
          government: TEGINT
      lobbying through girls' clubs led to the establishment of `gender desks'
      (posts focusing on gender
      concerns) in 17 local education authorities in Nigeria in 2010. Gender-sensitive
          school
          management: The study highlighted weaknesses in the management
      and monitoring of gender
      concerns in schools. Training and support was therefore given to all
      school committees involved in
      the project. This has so far enabled all TEGINT schools in Nigeria, and a
      third of project schools in
      Tanzania, to prepare gender-sensitive plans and budgets. Girls now take
      part in management
      committee meetings in over half of Tanzanian primary schools.
    Study 3: GEGPRI &#8212; South Africa: As a result of this
      research, the South African education
      depart	ment worked with provincial officials and schools to understand
      better the links between
      poverty, gender inequality and teenage pregnancy &#8212; and establish how
      schoolgirl pregnancy could
      be managed more effectively. One senior government official (S6)
      said the research had
      encouraged the department "to engage much more deeply with the complexity
      of inequality, the
      multiple causes of teenage pregnancy, the need to eradicate a `blaming
      girls' culture, how
      practically to bring girls back into schools. In my view, the research was
      ground-breaking:
      examining so many different layers of policy implementation and thinking
      about policy from the
      micro levels of schools, meso levels of district and provincial education
      departments, through to the
      macro levels of national and global policy". Global level:
      GEGPRI findings were used to frame the
      content of the UN Girls' Education Initiative (UNGEI) conference in Dakar,
      Senegal, in 2010
      (S7&amp;S8). The conference was attended by activists,
      academics, practitioners, girls, and high-level
      policy-makers, and helped to accelerate efforts to improve education
      provision for girls. Insights
      from the study also fed into 16 country action plans on girls' education
      developed at the conference
      and were reflected in the Dakar Declaration, which stressed the
      multi-dimensional aspects of
      poverty (S9).
    Studies 1-3: Ministerial Summit: In April 2013, the
      IOE findings also helped to inform a Call to
      Action that was issued at an eight-country `Learning for All' Ministerial
      Summit in Washington DC.
      Unterhalter was a member of the UNGEI group that helped to draft the Call,
      which, among other
      things, seeks strategic efforts to combat gender-based violence (S10).
      This Call was subsequently
      welcomed by the UN's Special Envoy for Global Education, Gordon Brown.
    House of Commons: Unterhalter was also invited (with
      University of London colleagues) to present
      evidence to the International Development Committee's 2012 inquiry into
      the post-2015 Millennium
      Development Goals (S11). Several of the researchers'
      recommendations - e.g. that there should
      be a standalone gender goal and that gender should be threaded through all
      the goals - were
      adopted by the Committee.
    
ImpactSummary

    The three studies described here have helped to improve the lives and
      prospects of girls in six
      African countries. Thanks to the IOE researchers and their project
      partners, hundreds of Nigerian
      families have allowed their daughters to return to school. In Kenya, a
      tougher approach has been
      adopted towards teachers who sexually abuse girl pupils. In Ghana, police
      are encouraging more
      girls to report assaults. Mozambique is promoting school clubs where
      issues such as HIV/AIDS
      can be discussed. Girls' clubs have been set up in Tanzania, and in South
      Africa education officials
      have been prompted to look for more effective ways of managing teenage
      pregnancy. The studies'
      reach has, additionally, extended beyond Africa, influencing many other
      countries' thinking on girls'
      education and two House of Commons inquiries into the post-2015 Millennium
      Development Goals
      and violence against girls and women.
    
UnderpinningResearch

    Context: Poverty, prejudice, and poor-quality education prevent
      about 100 million girls around the
      world from completing primary school. The UN and its member states are
      tackling this problem
      through Millennium Development Goal 3 (MDG3): "Promote gender equality and
      empower
      women". But what challenges must policy-makers and practitioners overcome
      to achieve this goal?
      This important question has been addressed in three IOE studies which have
      focused on Africa.
    Study 1: Stop Violence Against Girls In School (SVAGS):
      Dr Jenny Parkes (PrincipaI Investigator)
      and Jo Heslop (Research Officer)
    ActionAid invited the IOE to lead the research component of this
      five-year (2008-13) project which
      has involved girls aged 8-17 in 45 primary schools across Kenya, Ghana and
      Mozambique. The
      project used research, advocacy and community-level initiatives to support
      change at national,
      district and community/school level. The IOE team worked with eight
      partner organisations,
      including ActionAid. Key findings: The IOE's baseline report on
      the start-of-study findings paints
      an often bleak picture of girls' lives in impoverished communities (see
      reference R1). Most girls in
      the project districts (86% in Kenya, 82% in Ghana, and 66% in Mozambique)
      had suffered some
      form of violence in the previous 12 months. Almost one in three had
      experienced sexual violence
      during that time but few had reported attacks. Many girls had also missed
      out on schooling
      because of chores, childcare and unaffordable fees. Research methods:
      A mixed methodology
      study was conducted in the three countries (R2). Questions were
      asked about patterns of gender
      violence and legislation and policies for combating violence and
      discrimination. In collaboration
      with colleagues in each country, Parkes and Heslop designed the research
      and developed the
      annual monitoring and evaluation system. They also trained the study teams
      and led the analysis.
      The baseline study involved all 45 schools (13 in Ghana, 17 in Kenya, and
      15 in Mozambique) and
      2,757 respondents, including girls and boys, teachers and headteachers,
      parents, school board
      members, community leaders, district officials and police.
    Study 2: Transforming Education for Girls in Nigeria and
      Tanzania (TEGINT): Professor Elaine
      Unterhalter (PI) and Jo Heslop (RO)
    The IOE was also ActionAid's international research partner in TEGINT,
      which involved 72 schools
      in eight states in Northern Nigeria and 57 schools in six districts in
      Northern Tanzania. This five-
      year project (2007-12) addressed the obstacles that hamper girls'
      education and increase their
      vulnerability to HIV/AIDS. Local NGOs and research institutes in each
      country took part in the
      project. Key findings: The baseline study found that girls in
      Nigeria and Tanzania face multiple
      barriers to education &#8212; including early marriage, pregnancy, poverty and
      poor school conditions
      (R3). It recommended creating girls' clubs as spaces for collective
      empowerment. It also
      suggested increasing school management committees' capacity to promote
      gender equality and
      combat gender violence. Methods: The IOE researchers led the
      conceptualisation and design of
      the baseline study, conducted data analysis and produced national and
      cross-country reports.
      They also co-ordinated the endline studies and analysed the results.
    Study 3: Gender, Education and Global Poverty Reduction
      Initiatives (GEGPRI): Elaine
      Unterhalter (PI), Amy North (RO) and Chris Yates (Research Adviser)
    This ESRC-funded study (2007-11) used case study research to examine how
      global policies on
      gender equality, education and poverty reduction (such as MDG3) were
      understood and
      implemented in Kenya and South Africa. Key findings: The study
      revealed that there was
      considerable disconnection between the aspirations of global policy and
      the way in which it was
      being applied (R4 &amp; R5). Officials in ministries and
      provincial education departments, NGO
      organisers and teachers had few opportunities to think about gender,
      education and poverty and
      the links between them and often had stereotyped ideas about the poor. Methods:
      The IOE led the
      conceptualisation, design and analysis of case study research in 10 sites
      in Kenya and South
      Africa and in international organisations, working with partner
      universities in each country.
    