CaseStudyId: 44311
Title: 
Music in schools: Boosting achievement, enthusiasm and participation


ImpactDetails

Beneficiaries and dates of impact: IOE research has benefited people of all ages, including
professional musicians, music teachers and the wider public. The focus of this case study is the
impact of IOE research on school-aged children and their teachers in the UK and internationally,
including children with special needs and from deprived backgrounds. The impact from 2008-13
has hit high points with the growth of Sing Up since 2008, Musical Futures (nationally and
internationally) since 2010, the National Plan for Music Education in England in 2011 and the
extraordinary growth of Sounds of Intent in 2013.
Reach and significance: Sing Up and Musical Futures (MF) have reached millions of children in
the UK and abroad. By 2012, Sing Up had enhanced the learning and wellbeing of pupils in 96% of
England's 17,000 primary schools, an estimated 4.2m children1. Meanwhile, Sounds of Intent is
making an important difference to children with severe, or profound and multiple learning difficulties
internationally through its ground-breaking web resource, accessed by 3m unique visitors since
2012. As demonstrated below, these programmes have instrumental impact (influencing policy
and/or practice) and capacity building impact2 &#8212; by changing or enhancing music teaching and
learning &#8212; and conceptual impact &#8212; by broadening the way educators and governments think about
music education.
Impact in primary schools: Sing Up was launched under the Labour Government's Music
Manifesto to ensure weekly singing in primary schools (S4). It was also highlighted in the
Coalition's 2011 Plan for Music Education (S5), which points up singing's value to children and the
school community (R1, R3) and commends Sing Up's online resources (pp38-41). The IOE team
helped shape the programme initially and developmentally through its evaluation programme, with
Welch as its main research adviser. Sing Up's programme director confirmed that the practical
usefulness of Welch's research and his depth of knowledge and reputation had helped them attract
funding and "steer the strategic development of the entire programme" (S1). Sing Up became an
independent charity when government funding ended in 2012. By July 2013, 4,650 schools had
subscribed. Sing Up has boosted the confidence of thousands of primary teachers by providing
brief, effective training and an activity-packed website &#8212; a much needed development. Teacher
training: In 2008 EMI Sound Foundation funded music training for teachers in 150 primaries to the
tune of &#163;200,000, following 2007 research led by Hallam demonstrating knowledge gaps and lack
of confidence. After she evaluated the scheme, it was rolled out to 30 more schools in 2010. The
use of background music to improve behaviour and concentration has become common in schools
in the wake of her studies showing its benefits, as countless articles in the Press attest (e.g. S6).
Impact in secondary schools: Musical Futures is making an impact in the UK and
internationally. It "is regarded as one of the major advances in music-teaching pedagogy in this
country since the turn of the century", according to Classroom Music magazine (S5). The sponsor,
Paul Hamlyn Foundation (PHF), and the Innovation Unit built on its success to develop a whole-
school leadership programme aimed at engaging children in learning, encompassing the entire
secondary curriculum. The project, Learning Futures (2008-10), was built into their Engaging
Schools programme, which credits MF as a model (S2).
In the UK: more than 1,500 secondary schools in England (over a third) are incorporating this
informal learning model. Following further pilots in 2012, MF is being rolled out in Wales, Scotland
and Northern Ireland, where, in 2013, KS3 MF students performed in a Derry/Londonderry City of
Culture event. Recommended by the Music Manifesto, a partner in the programme (S4), it was
endorsed by the previous Labour Government. An evaluation for its sponsor3 found that its
introduction prompted a sharp rise in GCSE music enrolment, with above average results,
improved behaviour and raised self-esteem. MF was also positively evaluated by Ofsted. A
network of champion schools is developing MF methods and providing free CPD for neighbouring
schools, and MF is part of PGCE courses including those at Trinity College of Music and the
University of Wales, Cardiff.
In Australia MF is being used successfully by schools in Victoria, Queensland, New South Wales
and South Australia. The model features in teacher education courses and MF Australia has its
own Champion schools and website. An academic evaluation said: "After only two terms of
implementation, the impact of the program on both the teachers and the students has been quite
profound" (S3) and a report for the Victoria Government demonstrated its use across the Australian
national curriculum. In Brazil a network of schools, co-ordinated by two universities, is adopting the
informal learning model, and the Open University of Brazil is piloting it as a teacher-training unit.
Music educators from four universities joined forces to train music teachers in MF and in 2012
state schools piloted MF in four major cities. Cyprus has a paragraph on MF in its national
curriculum, in Canada it is supported by two school districts and in Singapore the informal learning
model is being phased into schools and teacher education.
Impact on special education: Sounds of Intent's innovative website garnered an exceptional
three million-plus visits from across every continent since its launch in 20124, with some 150
schools and 1,000 pupils registered by July 31, 2013. In this collaborative project, which was
highlighted by Ofsted, the IOE can take particular credit for enabling deep and extensive impact
through this sophisticated web resource developed by Himonides (S7) to help change perceptions
about the musical development that is possible with children and young people with complex
needs. Between its launch in 2012 and July 31, 2013, more than 350,000 separate interactive
teaching and learning resources were downloaded. The tool enables teachers, parents, therapists
and carers to assess and record the musical progress over time even of children who can only
blink one eyelid, and to share their own longitudinal data with other users. In 2012, the charity
Sound About (S8) received funding for wider dissemination of this important resource and then
trained teachers in 50 special schools during 2013.
Impact on policy: IOE findings (e.g. R1) lie behind the influential Henley Review, commissioned
by Education Secretary Michael Gove for the Year of Music (2010) and the National Plan for Music
Education that followed (S5). It was cited in 2010 by then schools minister Nick Gibb in the House
of Commons and by Gove at the Henley Review launch. Gibb said: "Research commissioned by
the DfE from the Institute of Education shows that `quality' music education improves behaviour,
attention and concentration and has a hugely positive effect on numeracy and language skills".
Gove added: "It is simply unfair that the joy of musical discovery should be the preserve of those
whose parents can afford it". Hallam also gave presentations to two All Party Parliamentary Groups
on the wider benefits of music to children and young people. Spending: Surveys of local authority
music services in 2005 and 2007 in England by Hallam and Andrea Creech helped provide the
rationale for increased government investment in music education. The previous Labour
government's Music education and the music grant (Standards2028Fund 1.11), for 2008-11, explicitly
acknowledges these surveys and lists the principal actions taken to address the issues they
highlighted (S9). These included funding changes designed to encourage LAs to prioritise
spending on KS2 instrumental and vocal programmes, an extra &#163;40m to ensure pupils had access
to the full range of instruments, and free CPD. The Coalition's Plan for Music Education also
sought to overcome the postcode lottery highlighted by these and other IOE studies and
maintained priorities such as high quality singing and instrumental learning for every child.
Additional international reach: IOE music researchers are sought around the world. For
example, Hallam has provided advice on the development of music services in Australia and the
US. Welch has been consulted about singing, teacher development and the evaluation of music
initiatives in Italy, the US, Sweden, the Ukraine, South Africa and the United Arab Emirates.

ImpactSummary

Findings from the IOE's substantial body of music research have had a significant impact on policy
for successive Governments and NGOs in the UK and overseas, as well as on teaching and
learning in the music classroom and outside. Research has led to curriculum innovation, increased
participation and investment in music for all ages, including those with special needs, benefiting
millions of children and young people attending schools in England and around the world. The
impact derives from a wide range of externally funded studies, embracing music learning across all
education sectors.

UnderpinningResearch

Context: The IOE has the largest group of music education researchers in the UK and Europe.
Their research embraces musical behaviour and development, learning and teaching throughout
life, with 53 projects worth a total of &#163;3m to the IOE since 2005. External funders include research
councils (ESRC, EPSRC, AHRC), Europe (European Social Fund, EC Framework 7), major
charities (Esm&#233;e Fairbairn, Paul Hamlyn, Youth Music, RNIB, Amber Trust), Central Government
(DCSF), Local Authorities (Newham, Liverpool, Greater London Authority) and other organisations
(for example, European Concert Hall Organisation, London Symphony Orchestra, Opera North,
The Sage Gateshead). Foci include singing and musical instrument learning across the lifespan
and the wider benefits of music, the development of innovative pedagogies, technology in music
education, professional development of musicians, music teacher education and music in special
education. This case study examines the impact of IOE research on music in schools. The
research studies highlighted here document not only the effects of excellent teaching on children's
musical skills, but the impact that a child's active engagement in music can have on: their
perceptual, language and literacy skills; numeracy; intellectual development; general attainment
and creativity; personal and social development; and physical development, health and wellbeing
(see R1). Within this diverse research activity, major projects include:
Primary schools: Evaluation of `Sing Up' (Professor Graham Welch (PI), Jo Saunders and
Evangelos Himonides, 2007-12)
Key findings: The IOE team created the largest database on children's singing globally and found
that children who took part in the Government's &#163;44m, 5-year singing programme were, on
average, two years ahead in their singing development (see research reference R3). Furthermore,
better singers tended to have a more positive view of themselves and a stronger sense of social
inclusion &#8212; a finding supported by related IOE research for the Italian government. How the
research was conducted: The IOE team was consulted in the initial design of the national
programme and, after a baseline audit of singing in 81 randomly selected schools, subsequently
expanded their multi-methods data collection to 11,000+ children and 1,000+ teachers from184
English schools to measure the programme's impact.
Secondary Schools: `Musical Futures' (Professor Lucy Green, 2002-07) Following a pilot study
in London, Green collaborated with Hertfordshire County Council on a national project to develop
and evaluate radical new teaching and learning strategies for 11-14-year-olds drawn from the
informal learning practices of popular musicians. This research brought a new method of teaching
into the classroom based on five key principles of informal music learning (e.g. R2) and built
bridges between the aims of institutional music education and the experience of many young
people. How the research was conducted: Green developed a new pedagogy based on popular
musicians' informal learning practices; teachers were then inducted into the pedagogy, and
implemented and evaluated it in their schools. Data were collected through participant observation,
audio recordings, teacher and student interviews, teacher meetings and anonymous
questionnaires.
Special Schools: `Sounds of Intent' (Welch and Himonides, with Adam Ockelford, Visiting
Research Fellow at the IOE and Professor of Music at Roehampton, 2002-ongoing) The project
was set up in collaboration with the RNIB to help overcome the immense variability of music
teaching for children in special schools. Initially, having worked closely with 10 schools to map the
musical development of children with learning difficulties, this dataset was used by Himonides to
design an interactive online resource to support music learning in special schools nationally (R4).
How the research was conducted: Researchers made thousands of observations from hundreds of
children to develop a model of musical engagement. Pedagogic materials (including video) were
trialled from case studies of more than 20 schools.
Wider benefits of music in schools: A literature review commissioned by DfES from Professor
Susan Hallam for the Year of Music highlighted music's powerful contribution to children's
education and wider development, including the direct link between music and improved reading
ability (R1 is a subsequent review article). A series of studies by Hallam demonstrated the value of
background music in the primary school as a means of changing behaviour and enhancing
learning (R5). 10-12 year-olds performed better in arithmetic and memory tasks with background
music than without.
