CaseStudyId: 44319
Title: 
    Young people in care: the support that puts university within reach
    

ImpactDetails

    Context: In 2002, a report by IOE academics for the Deputy Prime
      Minister's Social Exclusion Unit1 concluded: "The longstanding
        neglect of the education of children and young people in care has had an
        extremely negative effect on their life chances and involved enormous
        costs to them and to society as a whole. Reversing these effects will
        require substantial investment and fundamental changes in attitudes." In
        2013, their life chances, though still straitened, are gradually
        improving. IOE research has demonstrably helped prompt and underpin the
        needed changes in attitudes, policy and investment.
    Dates of impact: 2008-13, with particular impact at the start and
      the end of the period, with new legislation taking effect or currently
      going through Parliament.
    Principal beneficiaries: care-leavers, children in care and wider
      society.
    Reach and significance: This research has led directly to changes
      in the law in England and Wales to increase the financial support for
      young people from care backgrounds in HE. This is bolstered by better
      systems in FHE and LAs for helping these young people to stay in
      education. Most of By Degrees' 43 recommendations to central and
      local government and HEIs have become policy. This means that the 6-8,000
      19-year-olds every year who have been in care face fewer barriers to
      continuing their education, and some 500 of them &#8212; who do go on to HE -- have a better chance of completing their degrees. Support for the 89,000
      children in care, through Virtual Heads in every LA, is to become law in
      2013, as explained below.
    Impact through legislation: Extra bursary: Between
      2003 and 2012 the proportion of care-leavers in England in HE at age 19
      rose from an estimated 1% to 7% (DfE figures). Jackson's work was the
      first research demonstrating what is needed to raise participation and the
      only one cited in this context in the Children and Young Persons Act
        2008, which amended section 23C of the Children Act 1989 by
      requiring local authorities to pay a one-off additional bursary to
      care-leavers of 18 and over who take a course of HE. The memorandum on
      this regulation change explains that the bursary should be &#163;2,000 and
      makes explicit the link between the research and the policy change: "The
      amount is based on evidence [R3] that former relevant children
      finish higher education with an average of &#163;2,000 more debt than their
      peers." The document's accompanying briefing paper adds that the research
      by Jackson and her colleagues "suggests that the more support, including
      financial, that former relevant children had the greater their chances of
      success". The regulation took effect in September 2009 but care-leavers
      who started HE a year earlier were also entitled to the bursary. A
      companion Memorandum for Wales, which introduced the same bursary
      in the 2010-11 academic year, also makes it clear that the IOE study
      provided the rationale for the grant (S1 and S2). The
      findings and recommendations, combined with the power of the evidence
      presented in an earlier and ongoing intensive dissemination programme,
      also directly resulted in a tick box on the UCAS form from 2008 to
      identify these young people for receipt of extra funds and advice. For
      example, the study pointed out that students in receipt of inadequate
      support from their LA often took on too much paid work, which conflicted
      with their academic demands. In a 2013 survey for Buttle UK, 41% of 279
      students from care interviewed said they were influenced by the financial
      support available (S3).
    LA support until age 25: The 2008 Act also mandated support
      from a personal adviser until the age of 25 [R1] and a designated
      teacher in all maintained schools responsible for promoting the education
      of children in care (By Degrees recommendations). Jackson and
      colleagues can take considerable credit for such regulations. Brian
      Roberts, former head of Peterborough's Virtual School, and chair of the
      English Advisory Committee of the Fostering Network, said By Degrees
      is one of the most widely read "items of evidence" used in promoting the
      educational achievement of children in care (S4). His conversations
      with Ministers and MPs, in the coalition and the previous Labour
      government, had shown they were able to quote from the findings. "The
      research was central to changes in national legislation that made the
      educational achievement of children in the care system a statutory
      priority for local authorities," he confirmed.
    Virtual schools: The virtual school concept &#8212; positively
      evaluated [R5] by Jackson and researchers from Bristol, and already
      adopted voluntarily by most LAs, is to be mandated through the 2013
      Children &amp; Families Bill. Every LA will have to appoint a Virtual
      School Head responsible for the educational achievement of children in
      care. As the cut-off date for REF impact approached, seven charities,
      including Barnardo's and the National Children's Bureau, were campaigning
      for the Virtual Head's duties to extend to young people up to age 25,
      rather than 18, citing Jackson's evaluation. This change was being pressed
      in the House of Lords by the Earl of Listowel in advance of a second
      reading in the autumn.
    Buttle Quality Mark: The BQM &#8212; based on a By Degrees
      recommendation and supported by care charity Buttle (S6) &#8212; has been
      earned by 88 HEIs in the UK since 2006 &#8212; 56% of all HEIs, including 100%
      in Wales. Praised by KPMG Foundation in an evaluation of the scheme (S3)
      as "one of the key success stories for children leaving care", it is
      awarded to institutions that can demonstrate that they have a sufficiently
      robust strategy in place to support students from a care background. These
      universities express their commitment in slightly different ways but
      Cardiff, like many other HEIs, offers care-leavers an extra bursary and
      provides a named mentor for each student to discuss any concerns they
      have. Care-leavers are also guaranteed a hall of residence place in their
      first year (another By Degrees recommendation). BQM HEIs offer
      financial support packages worth between &#163;100 and &#163;6,000 a year &#8212; &#163;1,400 a
      year per student on average. Royal Holloway, University of London offers
      any student who is a care-leaver free accommodation for 365 days a year
      (worth &#163;6,000). At Leeds University and other HEIs with the award, student
      volunteers help young people in care with revision and college
      applications. Since 2011 the award has also been earned by more than 40 FE
      colleges and in 2012 an All Party Parliamentary Group Inquiry (S5)
      recommended that the BQM be rolled out nationally to all FHE providers.
      The evaluation reported strong support from all key strategic bodies in
      all four UK nations.
    Local authorities' care-leaver policies: The study's findings have
      informed many LA policy documents and have triggered changes in practice,
      in addition to those cited above. The Bristol leaving care team became the
      first to employ a teacher, as recommended in Jackson's research &#8212; which
      emphasised the importance of raising educational aspirations. More than
      110 LAs have signed up to the Government's Care-leavers Charter, launched
      in 2012, pledging they will support these young people until they reach 25
      (as recommended in By Degrees).
    Impact in Europe: By Degrees paved the way for YiPPEE (R1),
      which is now beginning to influence policy thinking across Europe. For
      example, an EC policy review (S8), based on YiPPEE and other EU
      projects, highlights the need to overcome the difficulties it documented,
      such as the financial pressures that force many care-leavers to choose a
      low-level job over HE. The review recommends that European legislation
      follows the lead set by England in the wake of Jackson's earlier research,
      and defines `care' for children in public care and on welfare as
      `educationally oriented'. In line with YiPPEE's evidence, it also says
      schools and welfare agencies should co-operate over efforts to encourage
      more young people from disadvantaged backgrounds to stay on in education.
      In the five YiPPEE countries, researchers have been asked to present the
      results to politicians, social workers and the public and have given radio
      and press interviews. Interest is also growing in non-YiPPEE European
      countries. In 2013, Jackson was invited to speak about her research in
      Norway and Germany. YiPPEE researchers proposed and contributed five
      papers to a special issue of the European Journal of Social Work,
      the first articles in that publication on the topic of young people from
      care backgrounds and HE (February 2013). This is important in relation to
      the YiPPEE finding that a factor in the poor attainment of children in
      public care is the low priority given by social workers to educational
      matters. In Sweden, Skolfam (School Focus in Foster Care), inspired by
      Jackson's work, is taking hold, first in Helsingborg in 2005, and since
      2008 in 10 other municipalities. By 2012, 100% of young people from four
      cohorts of Skolfam-children in Helsingborg (10 in all) had passed the
      high school entrance exam, exceeding the percentage for all Swedish
      children of 87%. In Catalonia, Spain, researchers are working with two
      regional ministries to continue YiPPEE's data collection for a further
      four years and a pilot programme to support children in care has begun.
      Additionally, thanks to YiPPEE, banks in Catalonia have provided grants to
      enable young people from care backgrounds to continue studying.
    
ImpactSummary

    IOE research, led by Professor Sonia Jackson, has resulted in improved
      educational opportunities for a particularly disadvantaged and
      under-recognised group of young people &#8212; those from the public care
      system. The study, By Degrees, triggered new legislation and
      support systems to help these young people get to university and complete
      their studies. It led directly to a mandatory &#163;2,000 bursary for
      care-leavers who go on to HE in England and Wales and the introduction of
      a prestigious quality mark now held by more than half of the UK's
      universities to highlight the extra support they offer care-leavers. The
      research is also beginning to influence policy thinking in EU countries.
    
UnderpinningResearch

    Context: Each year, some 6-8,000 British 19-year-olds who have
      been in care set out to make their way in the world. Those who go on to
      higher education number in the hundreds. Because of their small numbers
      these students had not been recognised as a distinct group. The principal
      aim of By Degrees was to produce evidence that would ultimately
      increase the numbers of such young people staying on in education. This
      influential study was underpinned by 20 years of Jackson's research (the
      last 12 at the IOE).
    By Degrees: From care to university: This five-year research
      programme (2000-2005), commissioned by children's charity Buttle UK,
      examined the experience of the one in 100 care-leavers who went on to HE
      at that time [see references R2, R3].
    Main findings: This and other IOE research [e.g. R4]
      provided clear evidence that UK care-leavers' ability and potential were
      being systematically underestimated. It showed they were deprived of most
      educational opportunities open to other young people and pointed to the
      specific barriers they faced. The main problems identified by participants
      at the point of application to university were lack of information and
      advice when choosing universities and courses; changes of residential
      placement during preparation for school exams; uncertainty about available
      financial support; and anxiety about accommodation during term-time and
      vacations. It found that students from care backgrounds struggled to make
      ends meet. Most took out the maximum student loan and their average debt
      after three years was &#163;11,235, compared with the national average of
      &#163;9,210, but only one local authority at the time helped them pay off the
      debt. Many took on too much paid work and had difficulty completing their
      coursework and dissertations.
    Methodology: By Degrees studied 129 care-leavers
      from three successive cohorts &#8212; by far the largest number of students
      formerly in care ever studied. The participants, who were attending 68
      universities, were interviewed on several occasions. Postal surveys of
      local authorities and HEIs were carried out near the beginning and end of
      the project and 11 local authorities' representatives were interviewed
      annually.
    Researchers: Professor Sonia Jackson, Sarah Ayaji and
      Margaret Quigley, Thomas Coram Research Unit, IOE.
    Young People in Public Care Pathways to Education in Europe (YiPPEE):
      This five-country 2008-10 study, undertaken by a team of researchers from
      Denmark, Hungary, Spain, Sweden and England, brought the aims of By
        Degrees into the European arena [R1].
    Main Findings: Across Europe, young people who have been in
      care fail to get to university because of "an overriding lack of support",
      with the separation of education and care in the services for these young
      people creating a particular barrier. The study concludes that training
      and selection of foster carers should place much more emphasis on them
      understanding the importance of education as an integral part of care. It
      also says that reliable statistics on care and education should be
      collected across Europe.
    Methodology: The YiPPEE researchers examined policy on
      children in care in European countries. They also surveyed national and
      local agencies and authorities and conducted a study of 18 to 24-year-olds
	  who showed educational promise.
    Researchers: The project was led by Claire Cameron
      (co-ordinator) and Jackson (director), with 13 additional collaborating
      partners and researchers from the 5 countries.
    Other research: Further evidence of the systematic underestimation
      of young people from care is provided by an earlier study co-authored by
      Jackson [R4], which showed how exceptional young people were
      overcoming their disadvantages. Later research by Jackson and her
      colleagues [R5] showed how local authorities' `virtual heads' &#8212;
      appointed to help children in care -- could help turn the tide. This study
      also recommended that they continue supporting young people up to age 25.
    