CaseStudyId: 44324
Title: 
    14-19 education and training: the case for a unified and inclusive
        system
    

ImpactDetails

    Principal beneficiaries: Education professionals and policy-makers
      at various levels have benefited from the ideas and practical strategies
      outlined in the work of Hodgson and Spours. Many of these have then
      impacted on young people in 14-19 education and training in England and
      Wales through better progression routes, guidance systems and improved
      programmes of study.
    Dates of benefit: From before 2008 to the present day.
    Reach and significance: The researchers have played an important
      role in shaping political and professional thinking on 14-19 education and
      training &#8212; not only in England and Wales but as far afield as Qatar. They
      have influenced Labour party and union policies, and provision in local
      authorities, colleges and schools. They have also helped to design
      national baccalaureate courses and qualifications frameworks. They have
      therefore made a range of `instrumental' impacts1 (influence on
        policy/practice). They have also achieved significant `conceptual'
        impacts (informing debate).
    Conceptual impact: Public engagement: Hodgson and
      Spours have made a major contribution to 14-19 debates since the 1990s by
      writing about their research for many specialist and mainstream magazines
      and newspapers, and giving interviews to high-profile radio and television
      programmes. They have argued consistently and effectively for a unified
      and inclusive 14-19 education and training system that meets the needs of
      every learner. Spours has written five articles for the Guardian
      alone since 2000 (three co-written with Hodgson). His most recent piece
      (see impact source S1), co-written with Neal Lawson of the Compass
      think tank, attracted more than 100 responses &#8212; including one from the
      High Master of Manchester Grammar School. Spours also edited Compass's
      2011 e-book, Education for the Good Society, and spoke at its
      Westminster launch. More than 150 people attended this event, including
      Stephen Twigg, the then Shadow Education Secretary.
    Conference and seminars: Hodgson and Spours have given
      around 100 presentations to audiences beyond the research community &#8212; in
      the UK and abroad &#8212; since 2008. The IOE Centre for post-14 Research and
      Innovation, which they jointly direct, organises events for practitioners
      and policy-makers, as well as researchers. Elizabeth Truss MP has twice
      attended one of the Centre's seminars, once shortly before becoming
      schools minister in 2012 and then again in March 2013. The Centre also
      supports the London Regional Post-14 Network, which reaches policy-makers
      and practitioners through its conferences and seminars. The Centre's open
      lecture series has been offered annually to the public for 20 years.
    Instrumental impact: Labour policy: Hodgson and
      Spours strongly influenced the Tomlinson proposals for a 14-19 diploma
      system (S2) &#8212; and although the Blair government rejected their
      recommendations, senior Labour politicians remain open to their arguments.
      Kevin Brennan, shadow minister for schools, invited them to brief him on
      their proposals for a unified curriculum on May 22, 2012 (S3) and
      some of their ideas were incorporated in the draft curriculum policy that
      Labour issued the following month. It states: "We therefore propose to
      explore a modernised version of the approach pioneered by the Tomlinson
      Report". Spours has since been invited to contribute to the David Blunkett
      review of school collaboration arrangements. He is also the organiser of
      an inquiry into a new model of education, sponsored by Compass and funded
      by the National Union of Teachers, which was launched in July 2013.
    Select Committee: When Hodgson appeared before the
      Education Select Committee in 2008 she argued for an extension of the
      aims-based curriculum to older teenagers &#8212; particularly as the
      participation age is to rise to 18. The Committee endorsed this suggestion
      in their subsequent report (S4): "We strongly recommend that an
      overarching statement of aims for the National Curriculum &#8212; encompassing
      the Early Years Foundation Stage, National Curriculum and 14-19 learners &#8212; be introduced, properly embedded in the content of the National
      Curriculum, in order to provide it with a stronger sense of purpose,
      continuity and coherence". They also made it clear that Hodgson's
      testimony had helped to clarify their thinking on this issue.
    Wales: Huw Evans, Chair of the 2012 Review of
      Qualifications for 14 to 19s in Wales, has said that Hodgson and Spours
      had a significant influence on his board's thinking (S5). A key
      question that Evans kept in mind during the Review was one that the
      researchers posed in their IOE professorial lecture in 2012: "Should
      education reflect and promote the more equal and democratic society that
      we want to build rather than reinforce its current inequalities and
      divisions?" He also said that their work had confirmed "our commitment to
      developing an inclusive 14-19 framework for Wales. This is to be achieved
      within a Baccalaureate model providing a unified pathway post-16". The
      Welsh Government broadly accepted all of the Evans Review's
      recommendations.
    Local authorities and pan-authority bodies: Hodgson and
      Spours are also advising LAs on 14+ Progression and Transition Boards
      (PTBs) &#8212; a new type of collaborative body that they conceived and
      designed. It brings together schools, colleges and work-based learning
      providers, employers, voluntary and community organisations, regeneration
      agencies, higher education institutions and local authorities. They are
      currently academic partners for the London Councils' Young People's
      Education and Skills Board and their ideas on 14+ PTBs are spreading
      across the capital. Two 14+ PTBs have been set up in North East
      Lincolnshire and Luton and other local authorities are showing interest.
    Qualifications and awards: Their Tomlinson work has
      influenced examination boards' thinking. The baccalaureate offered by AQA,
      the largest of England's exam boards, is a case in point. As a Guardian
      article on the AQA Bac commented: "Three years after Tony Blair kicked the
      Tomlinson diploma into the long grass, it is back in a new guise" (S6).
      The AQA Bac is now offered by more than 200 centres. From 2009-2011, the
      researchers also helped the Sixth Form Colleges Association (SFCA) to
      develop a baccalaureate &#8212; the SFBac Award &#8212; which recognises all-round
      learning and achievement at levels 1, 2 and 3. This involved working with
      pilot institutions and producing research reports for SFCA to inform the
      design and implementation of the award (S7).
    Students: Young people in the 11 sixth-form colleges that
      developed the SFBac now experience a broader post-16 curriculum and the
      wider activities they undertake are being recognised. Tens of thousands of
      students also benefit from the new 14+ PTBs that support their progress
      from school to work and HE. Bristol students have also gained from their
      institutions' collaboration with the IOE, and the Kingswood Partnership is
      now seen as an example of best practice in 14-19 education and training (S8).
    Teacher unions: Hodgson and Spours are working with the NUT
      and the University and College Union on a long-term project examining
      teacher and lecturer perceptions of 14-19 reforms. The project's first
      report was launched at a 2011 seminar involving both unions at which
      Hodgson and Spours gave the keynote address. The questionnaires they
      designed with UCU and the NUT in 2011-12 on teachers' and lecturers' views
      of 14-19 policy have underpinned campaigns in both organisations.
    Overseas influence: Their research on unified systems has
      now been carried into international work and they recently developed an
      inclusive National Qualifications Framework for Qatar.
    
ImpactSummary

    Some research achieves apparent impact because it travels in the same
      direction as the prevailing political wind. The researchers featured here
      have often headed into that wind by arguing that England should close the
      academic-vocational divide and establish a unified and inclusive 14-19
      education and training system that meets the needs of all learners. They
      have consequently made an important contribution to critical public debate
      on education policy and have helped to shape the thinking of teaching
      unions, government commissions, awarding bodies and local authorities.
      Their ideas have proved influential not only in England and Wales but also
      overseas.
    
UnderpinningResearch

    Context: Despite 30 years of costly experimentation, England's
      14-19 system is still failing to cater for the significant minority of
      teenagers who leave school or college with few or no qualifications and
      dismal job prospects. The challenge of creating a more inclusive system is
      one that Professors Ann Hodgson and Ken Spours of the IOE have been
      addressing since the 1990s. They were members of the Tomlinson Committee
      or its sub-groups (2003-4), directed the only independent research into
      the Curriculum 2000 Advanced level reforms funded by the Nuffield
      Foundation (1999-2002) and were two of the co-directors of the influential
      Nuffield Review (2003-9), the largest independent investigation into 14-19
      education and training in England and Wales for 50 years &#8212; see reference R1.
      They also directed and made important contributions to a four-year
      (2004-7) Teaching and Learning Research Programme (TLRP) project funded by
      the ESRC which evaluated the impact of policy levers on learning and
      inclusion and identified the main features of more equitable local
      learning systems (R2). This was followed by New directions in
        learning and skills in England, Scotland and Wales &#8212; another
      ESRC-funded project that took these ideas into the broader UK context.
    Key findings: Hodgson and Spours's research has led them to
      conclude that England's 14-19 system is largely responsible for many young
      people underperforming. They have identified four fundamental weaknesses:
    
      The persisting dominance of GCSEs and A-levels, which exclude and
        alienate many teenagers and overshadow vocational qualifications (R3).
      The proliferation of competitive education providers &#8212; including
        academies and free schools &#8212; that prevent collaboration over provision
        to meet the needs of all learners.
      The dominance of higher education and the marginalisation of employers
        and vocational education.
      The detrimental impact on teachers and learners of decades of top-down
        policies (R2).
    
    They have consequently called for an English Baccalaureate system that
      would incorporate all 14-19 qualifications and encompass both academic and
      vocational learning. They see this as a way of including all learners and
      fostering "a rounded and educated 19-year-old" (R1). In their view,
      greater collaboration between local networks of schools, colleges and
      work-based learning-providers is also essential if the needs of all 14-19s
      are to be met &#8212; especially as the participation age is to be raised to 18
      (R4 &amp; R5).
    Research methods: Hodgson and Spours have conducted many 14-19
      studies, literature reviews and evaluations over the past 20 years. They
      have interviewed thousands of teachers and students in many parts of the
      country. They have also interviewed university admissions officers,
      teacher union members, careers advisers, employers and policy-makers. For
      their TLRP project they tracked courses in 24 learning sites in London and
      North East England &#8212; eight in FE, eight adult courses in the community and
      eight workplace learning sites. They talked to learners, tutors and
      managers. Alongside this fieldwork, they and colleagues analysed policy
      documents and conducted 131 interviews with policy-makers and other key
      players. Hodgson and Spours also have long associations with several
      education providers, such as the Kingswood Partnership schools in Bristol,
      and for three years they tracked the education and employment `journeys'
      of two Kingswood cohorts who entered Years 9 and 11 in 2008. They are
      currently working as academic partners to London Councils, a cross-party
      body including all 32 of the capital's boroughs and the City of London.
    