CaseStudyId: 44326
Title: 
    Millennium Cohort Study: building a picture of a new generation
    

ImpactDetails

    Principal beneficiaries and impact dates: Policy-makers, children,
      parents and society. MCS began yielding benefits before 2008 and they are
      increasing each year.
    Reach and significance: MCS surveys have built up a uniquely
      detailed profile of the Millennium generation's diverse pathways through
      early childhood. The study is an exceptional resource for researchers, not
      only in the UK but around the world. It has also enabled policy-makers to
      target resources and interventions more effectively. MCS has achieved
      significant instrumental impacts2 (i.e. influencing policy/practice).
        It has also had conceptual impacts (informing debates) and has helped to
        develop quantitative research expertise (capacity building impact). IOE
        academics who manage the MCS and analyse its data maintain strong links
        with Westminster and devolved administration departments. Some of the
        following impacts stem from these close relationships.
    Instrumental impact: Breastfeeding: The MCS-based
      research that found breastfeeding to be associated with lower
      hospitalisation rates for respiratory infections and child diarrhoea has
      been widely cited by health organisations, most notably in the National
      Institute for Health and Care Excellence (NICE) guidance on Maternal and
      Child Nutrition (see impact source S1) and other advice
      from the Department of Health (S2). The finding is highlighted in
      nutrition guidelines and breastfeeding strategy documents published by
      many UK primary care trusts and in a breastfeeding information pack for
      children's centres issued in 2009 by the NCT (formerly the National
      Childbirth Trust), the UK's biggest parenting charity. The study is also
      cited by the British Dietetic Association in its 2013 policy statement on
      `Complementary Feeding: Introduction of solid food to an Infant's Diet'.
      It has influenced health policies outside the UK too. The research has
      helped to underpin the South Australian government's policy on
      breastfeeding. It is also referred to in documents issued by Unicef UK on
      behalf of the Baby Friendly Initiative, a worldwide programme of the World
      Health Organization and Unicef which has been implemented in 134
      countries.
    Immunisation: The findings from MCS-based research have
      been used to inform both national and local policies on immunisation
      training programmes and practice. The research by Pearce et al (R4)
      was referred to in the 2009 NICE guidelines on how to reduce differences
      in the uptake of immunisations among children and young people (S3).
      This authoritative guidance is for NHS and other professionals who work in
      children's services, local authorities, education and the wider public,
      private, voluntary and community sectors. Another important health
      education document that refers to MCS-based research on childhood
      immunisation was published by the King's Fund, the influential healthcare
      charity (S4).
    Overweight/obesity: The MCS team's finding that 22% of
      Welsh three-year-olds were overweight and just over 5 per cent are obese
      has had a significant impact. In January 2010, the Assembly Government in
      Cardiff launched the `All Wales obesity pathway' document &#8212; partly in
      response to this MCS finding. According to Children in Wales, a national
      umbrella organisation funded by the Assembly Government, the obesity
      prevention document was produced "further to evidence showing the
      proportion of adults and children who are not maintaining a healthy body
      weight is increasing". It then referred to the MCS obesity data (S5).
      Health boards in Wales now use the pathway document as a tool to review
      local policies, services and cross-departmental multi-agency activity for
      children and adults. Analyses of MCS data have also influenced the
      Scottish government's policy on childhood overweight and obesity (S6).
      In England, the National Obesity Observatory has made extensive use of MCS
      evidence. Its 2011 report, Obesity and Mental Health, says that MCS
      findings "act as a valuable reminder of how early relationships between
      obesity and well-being can emerge, and the need for public, family and
      individual level interventions for children". This organisation aims to
      offer a single point of contact for trusted information on evidence and
      research and works closely with policy-makers and practitioners involved
      in obesity and related issues.
    Wider policy influence: The MCS has informed policy thinking
    on not only health but also child development, social mobility, poverty and
    many other topics. There are countless references to the study in central
    and local government policy documents. The governments of Wales, Scotland
    and Northern Ireland have also drawn heavily on MCS data. For example, an
    MCS analysis that the Northern Ireland Executive commissioned from CLS
    researchers has played a key role in the development of Stormont's child
    poverty strategy (R5 &amp; S7). David Willetts, Minister of
    State for Universities and Science, has also referred on several occasions
    to the important role that the study plays in Westminster policy thinking.
    In 2010 he acknowledged that the MCS was "helping us assess what works when
    it comes to early-years interventions" (S8). A year later he told an
    audience at the British Academy in London: "... when you read stories about
    how effective early intervention actually is or about the effects on a child
    of different patterns of parental work, they are likely to draw on analysis
    of the millennium birth cohort" (S9).
    International influence: The MCS has not only influenced
      health-related policies in other countries, it has also caused some
      nations to set up their own longitudinal surveys. The study has, for
      example, inspired similar projects in Ireland, New Zealand and France. The
      importance of the IOE researchers' role in this respect has been confirmed
      by not only James Williams (see Quality Indicator comment) but by
      Professor Alan Hayes, Director of the Australian Institute of Family
      Studies. Professor Hayes said that the IOE's MCS team had "provided
      leadership with recent birth cohort studies in several countries, and have
      given particularly valuable support in the development of Growing Up In
      Australia: The Longitudinal Study of Australian Children" (S10).
    Conceptual impact: The study has also helped to shape public
      debate on family issues and marriage as well as poverty, education, social
      mobility and, of course, health. Many pressure group and think tank
      reports (e.g. S11) cite the MCS or research based on its data, and
      even the Primate of All Ireland (S12) has referred to MCS
      findings.
    Capacity building impact: The IOE's workshops on MCS offer
      training to research students, statisticians and data analysts from UK and
      overseas universities, and many other organisations. Between January 1,
      2008 and July 31, 2013 these workshops attracted 200 participants. More
      than two thirds were researchers at UK universities. Most of the others
      work for national and local government, public bodies, the third sector
      and think tanks. The number of users downloading MCS datasets has been
      climbing year by year. In 2008, 145 researchers downloaded the study's
      datasets but in 2012 that total rose to 267.
    
ImpactSummary

    The Millennium Cohort Study (MCS) has influenced health policy and
      practice at local, national and international levels. Breastfeeding
      research based on MCS data has made a particularly important contribution
      to health education, and important insights have been provided on
      immunisation and obesity. The study has also helped to shape policy
      thinking and public discussion on issues such as social mobility, family
      poverty and child development. The MCS has not only created an invaluable
      resource for researchers in the UK and other countries, it has also served
      as a model for other cohort studies. Leading researchers around the world
      say it sets the benchmark against which other child cohort studies will be
      measured.
    
UnderpinningResearch

    Context: The MCS has been surveying more than 19,000 children born
      in the four UK nations in 2000/1. It has conducted `sweeps' of the cohort
      at ages 9 months, 3, 5, 7 and 11 years and intends to follow them into
      adulthood. The study is based at the IOE and is managed by the Centre for
      Longitudinal Studies (CLS), an ESRC Resource Centre which also houses the
      1958 and 1970 birth cohort studies. CLS staff produce a unique data
      resource for the national and international research community (see
      references R1 and R3) and carry out their own analyses of
      MCS data. (R5). The MCS covers such diverse topics as parenting;
      childcare; school choice; child behaviour and cognitive development; child
      and parental health; parents' employment and education; income and
      poverty; housing and neighbourhood; social capital and ethnicity, and the
      growing fluidity of family structures. Its primary aims are to:
    
      collect detailed information over time on the life circumstances of
        the children
      trace links between their early life circumstances and later outcomes
      generate insights that will help to improve the health, development
        and wellbeing of future generations.
    
    Key health findings based on MCS data: Breastfeeding:
      The age 9 months survey conducted by CLS revealed that breastfeeding rates
      were lowest in disadvantaged wards of the UK and highest in advantaged
      ones. The IOE researchers also gathered information on the health problems
      that had required MCS babies to be seen by a doctor or be treated in a
      hospital in their first eight months. A subsequent analysis of this data
      by researchers at Oxford University and University College London (UCL)
      showed that breastfeeding protects against hospitalisation for diarrhoea
      and lowers respiratory tract infection. This follow-up study of 15,890
      full-term MCS babies estimated that if all UK infants were exclusively
      breastfed, the number hospitalised each month with diarrhoea would be
      halved, while respiratory infections admissions would be cut by a quarter
      (R2).
      Immunisation: The age 3 survey, carried out soon after the
      scare over the combined MMR vaccination, found that 6% of children had not
      received any immunisation against measles, mumps and rubella. The combined
      MMR vaccine was given to 88% of the Millennium cohort children1,
        while 6% received at least one vaccine separately. Within England, use
        of the combined MMR vaccine was highest in disadvantaged areas and in
        areas with a relatively high proportion of minority ethnic families. The
        CLS survey also showed that the association of maternal educational
        level with MMR is complex: mothers without qualifications or those with
        NVQ level 3 and above were more likely to have a completely unimmunised
        infant while those with higher educational qualifications were more
        likely to opt for at least one single vaccine. Later analysis, by a UCL
        team, of data on 14,578 of the MCS children confirmed that those in
        larger, less educationally advantaged families were more likely to
        receive the combined MMR vaccine (R4). The researchers concluded
        that although MMR uptake in this cohort was high, a substantial
        proportion of children remained susceptible to avoidable infection,
        largely because parents consciously decide not to immunise them, fearing
        the vaccine might be dangerous. One message from both the IOE and UCL
        analyses was that interventions to reduce incomplete immunisation need
        tailored approaches.
        Overweight/obesity: MCS children were weighed and measured
        at ages 3, 5 and 7. This enabled IOE researchers to calculate the
        proportion of girls and boys who were overweight or obese at these ages.
        Almost one in four of the MCS cohort was in one of these categories at
        age 3. Girls were more likely than boys to be overweight or obese at age
        5 (23% of girls and 19% of boys) and at age 7 (23%, 18%). A higher
        proportion of seven-year-olds in Northern Ireland (24%) and Wales (23%)
        was overweight or obese than in England (20%) and Scotland (19%).
    Survey methods: MCS children were selected through child benefit
    records to provide a representative sample of the total population, and to
    permit analysis and comparison of sub-groups. Children in the three smaller
    UK nations were intentionally over-sampled, as were those in areas of
    economic disadvantage or (in England only) high minority ethnic settlement.
    This approach allows analysis of these groups to achieve statistical power.
    The data quality is unusually high because the fieldwork is carried out to
    exacting specifications, it is preceded by thorough piloting, and the data
    are rigorously checked. After each survey the data are deposited in
    anonymised form with the UK Data Service, and are available to registered
    academic researchers.
    