CaseStudyId: 44321
Title: 
    Infant crying and sleep research: soothing babies and helping parents
    

ImpactDetails

    Reach and significance: Research by St James-Roberts, conducted
      over several decades, has helped to achieve a paradigm shift in the
      understanding and treatment of infant colic, crying and sleep problems. It
      has informed millions of parents and has paved the way for the development
      of interventions to help families and substantially reduce governments'
      health costs. It is also contributing to the work of others designed to
      prevent shaken baby syndrome.
    Principal beneficiaries and dates: Parents around the world who
      visit authoritative websites, clinics or healthcare professionals to seek
      information on infant crying or sleeping. Healthcare and medical
      professionals have benefited too as they now have more reliable evidence
      to offer parents. The impact began before 2008 and continues to accumulate
      as more and more guides for parents and guidelines for professionals cite
      St James-Roberts's research.
    Impact on policy and practice: Colicky crying: His work
      has added to evidence that different parenting approaches have little
      effect on colicky crying, which is common in early infancy. This has
      provided reassurance that parents are not to blame for this type of infant
      crying. In the UK, this evidence has resulted in a move towards health
      services that focus on providing parents with information and practical
      support in managing infant crying. For example the wording of the
    National Institute for Health Research's 2012 call for research to
      underpin an intervention package for parents of infants who cry
      excessively shows the influence of this research, by focusing directly on
      supporting parents rather than trying to treat an infant presumed to be
      unwell (S2). In 2012, St James-Roberts was also invited by the Rome
      Foundation, a charity concerned with Functional Gastrointestinal (GI)
      Disorders, to join the expert panel that is developing international
      guidelines for clinicians diagnosing paediatric GI disorders.
    Shaken baby syndrome: Findings from his research form part
      of the body of work that is helping to combat this syndrome. The Period Of
      Purple Crying website, sponsored by the US National Center on Shaken Baby
      Syndrome, includes three Infant Sleep pages by St James-Roberts (S3),
      which have had more than 60,000 views since publication in October 2009.
      One parent emailed: "You have no idea how difficult it is to find an
      un-biased summary of ways to deal with night waking ... It is very easy to
      find information on how to execute the methods, but next to impossible to
      find a backgrounder that simply describes the problem so that as a parent
      you can assess the behaviour before deciding how to deal with it" (S11).
      A paper St James-Roberts published in Child Abuse Review (S4)
      also appears in the section on parent education and child abuse prevention
      in the library of the US National Criminal Justice Reference Service. The
      reach of his research is enhanced by the citation of his work in A
        Journalist's Guide to Shaken Baby Syndrome (S5). This guide
      is published by the US Department of Health and Human Services Centres for
      Disease Control and Prevention. The guide says: "The key here is that
      crying is normal and is not the problem. The problem is how
      caregivers respond to a baby's cry."
    Professional and public engagement: St James-Roberts works closely
      with organisations that educate new parents about infant sleep and crying
      issues &#8212; and the professionals who advise them. For example, his 2012
      guide for professionals and families (R5) is helping to underpin an
      Institute of Health Visiting sleep campaign designed to update
      practitioners (S6); it is recommended in the Institute's
      practitioner training sessions, including those run jointly with NetMums.
    NCT adviser: St James-Roberts has been a member of the
      NCT's Research Advisory Panel since 2010. Mary Newburn, NCT head of
      research (S7), says: "Ian understands our commitment to being both
      parent-centred and evidence-based. We are using two questions on
      persistent crying from his earlier research in our longitudinal study of
      parents, as this is an aspect of parenting that causes considerable stress
      and concern. We ... feel it is invaluable to have his support, based on
      his detailed empirical comparative research". St James-Roberts is cited in
      the NCT's information for health workers (S8) and its web articles
      for parents and professionals.
    Trusted websites: His findings also substantiate advice on
      the most widely-trusted national and international websites, including
      those of NHS Direct and Unicef (S9). Leading commercial
      organisations such as Mothercare also cite his research.
    International reach: Articles both by St James-Roberts and
      about his work are included in the Encyclopedia on Early Childhood
        Development (S10). Produced by Montreal University, the Encyclopedia
      has been translated into French, Spanish and Portuguese and is presented
      in three levels of language for different needs. His work is also cited by
      many parents' organisations and health websites in countries including the
      US, Australia, Canada and Singapore, as well as the UK. He is, for
      example, an `expert panellist' on websites for new parents such as
      babycentre.co.uk. His advice for parents has been translated into many
      languages, including French, Spanish, Romanian, Croatian and Turkish.
    
ImpactSummary

    Parents, healthcare professionals and policy makers across the globe have
      benefited from Professor Ian St James-Roberts's research and writing on
      understanding infant sleep and crying. His findings over 20 years underpin
      government and third-sector guidance for health staff in the UK, US,
      Canada and Australia. His research has also informed &#8212; and eased the minds
      of &#8212; countless parents in these and many other countries. It features in
      the practical advice provided by the National Childbirth Trust (NCT), the
      UK's biggest parenting charity, and is cited on many other authoritative
      websites for parents around the world.
    
UnderpinningResearch

    Context: For many years parents, particularly in the West, have
      been offered conflicting advice on how to respond to very young babies who
      cry excessively or have problematical sleep patterns. Many parents have
      consequently not known whether to try to stick to a predetermined sleeping
      and eating schedule or react to their child's every demand. Nevertheless,
      until Professor St-James Roberts of the IOE conducted his breakthrough
      study (see reference R1), researchers had struggled to identify a
      methodology that would provide the reliable answers that parents craved.
    Research methods: The 2006 study led by St James-Roberts compared
      the crying and sleeping of three groups of infants whose parents had
      elected to adopt different forms of care. The researchers focused on
      mothers in:
    1) London (who indicated that they were most likely to follow a schedule)
    2) Copenhagen (who were expecting to be more responsive to their babies)
      and
    3) a `proximal' group drawn from both countries who planned to hold their
      infants for much of the time that they were awake and respond rapidly if
      they cried.
    Mothers in the first two groups were recruited via maternity wards within
      three days of their babies' birth while those in the third group were
      identified through natural parenting networks. All the mothers (275 in
      total) were asked to keep a diary of their infants' crying and night
      waking as well as their own responses at 8-14 days, 5-6 weeks and 10-14
      weeks of age. They also completed questionnaires on their babies' feeding
      and sleeping patterns. Researchers made home visits and carried out
      observations.
    Key findings: The study revealed that the `proximal' parents held
      their infants for 15 to 16 hours a day and were more likely than the other
      two groups to sleep with them. They also fed their babies more often.
      London parents had 50 per cent less physical contact with their infants
      and stopped breastfeeding earlier than the other groups. They also left
      their crying babies for longer. Copenhagen parents fell between the other
      groups in terms of the amount of contact they had with their infants. The
      study also found that:
    
      comforting babies may work better than leaving them to cry &#8212; at least
        during the first few weeks of life. The London infants cried 50 per cent
        more than babies who received more attention at two and five weeks of
        age.
      colicky crying (unexplained bouts of crying that affect between one in
        five and one in seven healthy children) at 5 weeks are unaffected by
        parental care.
      As the infants got older, switching from comforting on demand to care
        that emphasised routines was beneficial: it helped to reduce crying out
        in the night, probably because it helped infants to learn to remain
        settled at night. (This finding is supported by controlled trials by St
        James-Roberts and others (R3).)
    
    St James-Roberts and his colleagues concluded that different parenting
      styles are associated with different sets of advantages and disadvantages.
      Overall, it was the Copenhagen parents who followed a middle path &#8212;
      neither remaining `hands off' nor responding to every demand &#8212; and their
      infants who fared best.
    Researchers: The work of St James-Roberts and his colleagues sits
      within a highly-respected body of health education and family research at
      the IOE's Thomas Coram Research Unit (TCRU). This includes influential
      work on sex education, family breakdown, parenting, childhood wellbeing
      and children from care backgrounds.
    The study described here was conducted by Professor St. James-Roberts
      (PI), Emese Csipke, Tanya Abramsky and Jennifer Goodwin (all TCRU) and
      Marissa Alvarez and Esterh Sorgenfrei (both University of Copenhagen).
    Related research: More recently, St James-Roberts and his IOE
      colleague Emma Peachey have sought to distinguish prolonged crying
      behaviour from sleep-waking problems. They demonstrated that most colicky
      infants at 5-6 weeks were no more likely than other children to be
      unsettled in the night by 12 weeks (R2). St James-Roberts has also
      helped to dispel the myth that colicky crying in early infancy is
      attributable to gastro-intestinal disturbance. He has summarised evidence
      that such disturbances affect only about 1 in 100 infants. Many infants
      who are taken to see doctors are simply at the extreme of the normal range
      of crying behaviour. At the same time, St James-Roberts has acknowledged
      that many parents are left seriously distressed by their babies' crying (R3).
      In extreme cases, this has been known to trigger `shaken baby syndrome',
      resulting in brain damage or death. He and his fellow researchers have
      also highlighted the hidden financial costs of infant crying and sleep
      problems. A 2001 study he co-authored estimated that the professional time
      devoted to discussing such issues with parents of infants was costing the
      NHS about &#163;65 million per year (R4).
    