CaseStudyId: 44322
Title: 
    Education plc: new philanthropy and old inequalities
    

ImpactDetails

    Beneficiaries and dates of impact: Ball also feels uncomfortable
      about the idea that his research has `beneficiaries', at least in the
      traditional sense. He seeks to be `useful' by helping people, particularly
      teachers, to "think about what they do", and to think too about what
      policy-makers, edu-businesses and the new breed of philanthropists are
      doing &#8212; and how the UK education system continues to help reproduce the
      class system. Teachers, trade unions and pressure groups campaigning on
      behalf of state education have gained most from his research &#8212; throughout
      the REF period. But the public has also benefited from his important
      contributions to general debate on issues relating to education policy and
      social justice.
    Reach and significance: Ball's research has been discussed by
      teachers, union representatives and education commentators as far apart as
      Alaska and Australia. The distance his thoughts have travelled helps to
      underscore their importance for those who care about education and social
      equity. Websites based in North and South America, Australia and Europe
      carry discussions on his work, and teacher unions throughout the
      English-speaking world, particularly Australia and the UK, use his
      research to help them make sense of &#8212; and argue against &#8212; education policy
      developments such as inter-school competition and performance benchmarking
      (S1). Ball does not claim that his work has had an instrumental2
        impact (influencing policy and practice), although he gave evidence to
        the House of Commons Education Select Committee inquiry into the 15-19
        examinations system in 2012 and was quoted twice in the Committee's
        report (S2). But he has certainly had widespread conceptual
        impact (enhancing general understanding and informing debate).
    Privatisation: Ball's 2004-7 research (R2) resulted in an
      invitation to produce a major report, Hidden Privatisation in Public
        Education (2008), for Education International (S3).
      This Brussels-based body is the world's largest federation of unions,
      representing 30 million education employees in about 400 organisations in
      170 countries and territories. The EI report, co-written with Dr Deborah
      Youdell while she was at the IOE3, maps and examines the spread and
        consequences of the reconfiguration of education in the market form
        around the world. The report was translated into Japanese, German and
        Polish by EI's affiliates and has since been used extensively in the
        advocacy work of many unions. Teacher unions (e.g. the Canadian
        Teachers' Federation and the Australian Education Union) also shared the
        findings with their members. EI says that the concepts of `endogenous'
        and `exogenous' privatisation4, which Ball and Youdell conceived
          and explored in their report, are now "firmly embedded in global
          unions' conceptual framework about privatisation ... [the report]
          played a catalyst role in teacher unions' policies worldwide" (S4).
          Fred van Leeuwen, EI's general secretary, explains that one of the
          study's key purposes was "to get the trend towards privatisation out
          into the light of day. We need to get greater transparency ... so that
          we can engage in an open debate about the future of education in our
          societies". Websites and newspapers around the world, including the Manila
            Times and the South China Morning Post, helped to ensure
          that this goal was achieved by reporting the study's findings.
          Organisations such as the Global Campaign for Education also
          publicised the study.
    Pressure groups: Ball lends his support to a number of pressure
      groups that promote state education, such as the Anti Academies Alliance
      (AAA), Local Schools Network and the Campaign for State Education. These
      organisations have invited him to speak at their events (e.g. a major AAA
      conference in TUC headquarters for parents, governors and school staff on
      June 11, 2011). They have also promoted and discussed his research on
      their websites. Margaret Tulloch, chair of Comprehensive Future,
      commented: "Education research is often of little relevance to education
      non-professionals such as parents and governors who nonetheless have a
      serious interest in education policy and, in particular, want to campaign
      for change. Professor Ball's research and his ability to bring its
      findings to a non-professional audience are very important in this area.
      We are undergoing a very serious shift in how education is managed, so
      research in this area is vital. His impact has been to raise awareness and
      provide evidence for campaigners, for example in mapping the extent of
      edu-business and the profound changes in how schools are governed" (S5).
    Performativity: Ball's analyses of the consequences of
      managerialism and its methods and values (performativity) have also helped
      to shape the University and College Union's (UCU) thinking on
      professionalism. A recent UCU policy paper states: "Any explanation of the
      kind of professionalism that is now required will need to take account of
      the external forces and circumstances facing education and
      educationalists. It also must take account of the very insidious ways that
      the culture across education has become infected by managerialism,
      commodification and marketisation, and how these processes become
      internalised and then eat away at the professional soul of UCU members.
      This process has been referred to as `performativity'." The paper also
      quotes Ball as saying: "Performativity invites and incites us to make
      ourselves more effective ... to improve ourselves and to feel guilty or
      inadequate, if we do not" (S6). Dan Taubman, UCU's senior
      education officer (S7), said that Ball gave a brilliant
      presentation to a UCU seminar in March 2013. "His presentation based on
      his extensive writing on this subject was clear and cogent. His analysis
      of professionalism in education in an age of managerialism engendered a
      great deal of discussion and interest. Professor Ball spoke about the
      underlying trends that impacted on educational professionalism and was
      able to illustrate his central thesis with current examples from
      education."
    Conferences and seminars: Ball has addressed countless other
      seminars and conferences over the REF period &#8212; and many of them have been
      attended by teachers, governors, trade unionists and members of the
      public. He has spoken at TUC and NUT conferences as well as teacher union
      events in Australia and Canada. He has also given public lectures on his
      work in Britain (for example, in Cambridge, Huddersfield, Southampton,
      Bath, Chester and Strathclyde), Australia (Sydney), Germany (Halle) and
      the US (Madison, Wisconsin). In March 2013 he delivered The Vere Forster
      public lecture in Dublin &#8212; to an audience including Ireland's Chief
      Inspector of Schools and senior officials in the Irish education
      department. As a result of this address, an Irish radio station, Dublin
      City FM, invited Ball to talk for half-an-hour on the educational impact
      of neo-liberal ideas (S8). One listener later contacted the station
      to say: "So much food for thought here and a wake-up call to those of us
      who have been seduced by the 'common sense' of the market, managerialism
      and performativity. Stephen explained his way of developing his world view
      so well by describing the sociological toolbox that he dips into. Long
      live the teacher as intellectual".
    Media coverage: Some of the most highly-regarded UK education
      journalists and commentators have taken a close and continuing interest in
      Ball's work on privatisation and Conservative and New Labour education
      policies and have interviewed him many times. They include: Peter Wilby (Guardian
      and New Statesman), Richard Garner (Independent), Jessica
      Shepherd (S9) and Fiona Millar (both Guardian) and Warwick
      Mansell (TES and freelance). Guardian columnist Seamus
      Milne and Matthew Taylor (RSA chief executive and Tony Blair's former
      chief political adviser) are among the other prominent commentators who
      have highlighted his research findings. Ball recognises the value of using
      the media to get his ideas across to the world beyond academia and adopts
      a proactive approach. He writes blogs and newspaper articles that
      invariably generate a big response from readers. One of his Guardian
      comment pieces, pointing out that the shift towards marketised education
      is combined with an authoritarian and nostalgia-driven approach to the
      curriculum, drew no fewer than 253 comments from readers (S10).
    Effect on teachers: Ball is acutely aware of the irony of his work
      on `performativity' being used in a REF impact case study. He takes
      comfort in the knowledge that his research is useful to teachers.
    "Last year [2012] I gave a talk about performativity in education to a
        very mixed group of people, including teachers and students. Afterwards
        a woman came up to me and said: `Thank you, thank you very much for
        that. I resigned as a teacher last year'. She then added: `Now I know
        why I resigned ... emotionally I couldn't cope anymore. I found what was
        happening to me abhorrent'. And although, in a sense, that's a sort of
        negative example I was very pleased with that because I think she was
        saying that she now had the tools to make sense of her experience. She
        hadn't been able to analyse it intellectually, and she now knew why she
        had made the right decision from her point of view."
    That is the kind of impact that matters most to Ball.
    
ImpactSummary

    Professor Stephen Ball has produced a series of highly provocative
      analyses of English education policy and the neo-liberal education
      concepts and practices that have taken root in an increasing number of
      countries. He has also raised awareness of the growing significance of
      international edu-businesses and philanthropists. His work has proved
      valuable not only to national and global teachers' organisations but to
      pressure groups and think tanks seeking to protect the state education
      system. Teachers have also derived comfort and insight from Ball's
      research as it allows them to gain a better understanding of the mundane
      but powerful managerial and market forces that influence how they work and
      relate to themselves.
    
UnderpinningResearch

    Context: Stephen Ball is Karl Mannheim Professor in the Sociology
      of Education at the IOE. His research reflects his deep concern for social
      justice and covers three linked areas: the effects of 'markets' and
      market-orientated thinking on educational policy and provision; the
      influence of within-school processes on life-chances; and the enduring
      effects of social class on education choices and experiences. Much of
      Ball's work entails exploring and analysing contemporary changes in
      education policy and in the forms of the state. His analyses often adopt a
      historical perspective and employ sociological concepts, theories and
      methods &#8212; particularly those of Michel Foucault and Pierre Bourdieu. For
      many years, Ball has been concerned with how the middle classes utilise
      policy for their benefit, effectively to the detriment of the less
      privileged. In more recent times, he has written also about the new policy
      participants &#8212; edu-businesses and philanthropists &#8212; and on privatisation,
      contracting and marketisation. He has sought to trace the effects of these
      changes on democracy, classrooms, teachers and individual families.
    New philanthropy: Ball argues that we now have something akin to a
      global educational policy, based on neo-liberal tenets (see reference R1).
      His research also demonstrates that philanthropy, business and governments
      are coming together in new networks and policy sites outside the framework
      of the nation state. The network maps that Ball and his IOE colleagues
      have produced have identified the key corporations, think tanks and
      private and voluntary sector bodies that inhabit this new world. These
      maps have also highlighted the almost complete absence of universities,
      unions and academics from these influential networks. As Ball points out,
      the `new' philanthropists, such as Microsoft's Bill Gates, operate
      transnationally and have the power to `partner' with governments in
      solving problems and to enact policy, often beyond any sort of democratic
      oversight. Ball's ESRC-funded work (2008-10) on the new forms of
      philanthropy builds on his earlier audit and mapping (2004-7) of education
      businesses in the UK (R2), which was also funded by the ESRC.
      Though he raises critical questions about the roles of philanthropy and
      multi-national education companies, Ball argues that blanket defence of
      the public sector as it was &#8212; against the inroads of privatisation &#8212; is
      untenable. There is no going back to a past in which state schools worked
      fairly in the interests of all learners, he says, because there was no
      such past.
    Methods: For their 2008-10 study, Ball and IOE research
      officer Dr Carolina Junemann, interviewed philanthropists and
      philanthropic foundations and used network, document and social media
      analysis &#8212; a combination that they call `network ethnography'. Ball began
      to develop this approach in his 2004-7 study of senior executives from
      leading education services companies.
    Old inequalities: Since joining the IOE in 2001, Ball has produced
      a series of analyses of New Labour and Conservative education policies. He
      has, for example, drawn attention to what he sees as the many
      contradictions in Conservative education policy (R3) &#8212; between the
      party's modernising rhetoric of giving children `the chance to test
      themselves outside their comfort zone' and their prescriptions of
      traditional forms of discipline and curriculum. He has concluded that this
      apparent incoherence reflects the diverse challenges faced by the state
      and the different core constituencies of Conservative support. Ball has
      also argued that New Labour's policy interventions actually provided even
      more opportunities for middle-class parents to seek social advantage (R4).
      Issues relating to race and class inequalities have been marginalised by
      the drive to economic competitiveness. Methods: These
      conclusions were derived from three ESRC-funded studies that Ball
      undertook with Professor Carol Vincent of the IOE: `A Market in
      Love' (2001-3), `Local Childcare Cultures' (2005-7) and `The Educational
      Strategies of the Black Middle Class' (2009-11). Professor David Gillborn
      and Dr Nicola Rollock, who both moved to the University of Birmingham in
      2012, were co-researchers on the third of these studies. In each of these
      projects, Ball and his colleagues employed a form of policy analysis using
      post-structural theory and methods &#8212; a combination of discourse analysis,
      social network analysis and genealogy.
    Teachers as subjects: Ball has also helped education professionals
      to develop a better understanding of the social, economic and cultural
      context in which they work. He uses and develops the concept of
      `performativity'1 to describe the new mode of regulation that enables
        the state to govern in an 'advanced' liberal way (R5). Teachers
        are required to organise themselves in response to targets, indicators
        and evaluations and to set aside personal views as to what constitutes
        high quality teaching. For some, this presents a chance to be excellent,
        for others it creates profound personal misgivings. Perversely,
        `performativity' produces opacity rather than transparency, he says,
        because individuals and organisations take ever-greater care over the
        construction and maintenance of fabrications, through `gaming' and
        selective representation.
    Methods: Ball has conducted two projects on
      `performativity' since joining the IOE -- each based on school case
      studies and interviews with school workers. The first (2000-4; funded by
      the EU) with Professor Christian Maroy, then of the University of Louvain,
      Belgium, and the second (2008-10: ESRC) with Professor Meg Maguire (King's
      College London) and Dr Annette Braun (IOE).
    