CaseStudyId: 44327
Title: 
    `Sexting' and the school curriculum: research for gender equality in
        the digital world
    

ImpactDetails

    Principal beneficiaries: Those who develop policy and guidance on
      issues such as internet safety, bullying and PSHE; teenagers and their
      teachers; wider society, particularly parents and families who face new
      challenges in understanding and supporting young people's ethical uses of
      mobile technology in an increasingly digital culture.
    Date of impact: 2008-13, with particularly high impact in 2012,
      with the NSPCC `sexting' study and, in 2013, with the influential speech
      by Diane Abbott MP to the Fabian Women's Network critiquing and
      challenging the `pornification' of British society.
    Reach and significance: The research struck a popular chord
      because so little was understood by the adult world about youth, gender
      and sexuality in the digital age. Ringrose's findings made it clear that
      school policies and curriculum, including PSHE sessions, needed to do
      more. The research has raised awareness of these issues across the UK and
      internationally, inspiring further studies in several countries and
      considerable debate &#8212; including substantial media coverage in UK, USA,
      Canada and Australia. It has informed guidelines, resources, government
      and third sector reports and ministerial thinking. Ultimately, it could
      help girls and boys to resist sexual bullying and pressure. Its impact has
      been instrumental1 (affecting policy and practice) and conceptual
        (sparking public debate and greater political awareness).
    Conceptual impact: Ever since her research on teen girls and
      social networking was first profiled in the TES in 2008 &#8212; and followed up
      in a range of national broadsheets &#8212; Ringrose has walked a careful and
      successful path through the media minefield. Given the nature of her
      subjects &#8212; which could easily spark salacious coverage &#8212; she has
      overwhelmingly achieved the `right' kind of impact. Working with press
      officers at the IOE, and later the NSPCC, she has led a sensitive public
      discourse on uncomfortable subjects, resulting in generally positive
      messages about the need for gender equality in schools and society. Partly
      because of this responsible and measured, but substantial, press coverage,
      she developed a profile as expert adviser on girlhood and `sexualisation',
      leading to much of the impact detailed below.
    Public engagement: Diane Abbott: Ringrose was
      invited to meet the MP after an aide drew Abbott's attention to the Huffington
        Post's report on her book Postfeminist Education (R1).
      Drawing heavily on Ringrose's research and recommendations, the then
      shadow health minister called for a "revolution" in sex education to
      combat Britain's emerging "hypersexualised culture". "We need to start a
      national conversation between parents and their children about sex,
      pornography and technology", she said. Abbott credited Ringrose's ideas:
      "Today's speech was inspired by academic Dr Jessica Ringrose who argues in
      her book Postfeminist Education that sexually active school girls
      are often `slut shamed' and bullied by their peers", noted at least one
      newspaper (see impact source S6). A Google search finds
      tens of thousands of references to Abbott's `pornification' speech,
      including coverage in every major UK news outlet, worldwide coverage and
      intense debate in the blogosphere. The BBC's report alone received 579
      comments and the Guardian's report a further 255. The Huffington Post
      article attracted 336 comments on its website. The speech resulted in
      extensive public engagement with Ringrose's findings and ideas.
    Media and seminars: Ringrose has appeared in such outlets
      as BBC Radio Woman's Hour and Elle Magazine (UK), and was academic adviser
      to a Panorama television programme, which also interviewed her.
      She has participated in numerous seminars and conferences, speaking to
      multiple stakeholders. These include keynoting for a Welsh Government
      conference for teachers and students on `Children, Sexuality and
      Sexualisation' (2011), the UK Council for Psychotherapy's child and
      adolescent therapy conference (2012) and the All Wales Sexual Health
      Network conference (2013). She convened a cutting edge international
      conference for practitioners, campaigners, activists and academics on
      `pornification' at the IOE in 2011.
    Impact on policy: Ringrose has advised on reports and reviews in
      the UK and Europe since 2008.
    
      Her research was cited 16 times in the 2010 Home Office report, The
          Sexualisation of Young People, on which she was an Expert Advisor
        (S5). Its author, Linda Papadopoulos, confirms that Ringrose's
        research (e.g. R5) and advice helped shape recommendations for
        schools on sexualisation, sexual bullying and gender equality. "Her
        groundbreaking research on how young people use and interact on social
        networking sites and her discussions of how to address sexual
        cyber-bullying through the views of young people helped shape the
        recommendations around new media technology", Papadopoulos adds (S4).
        The Sexualisation report had a significant influence on policy
        and government attitudes to sexualisation.
      Ringrose served on the Advisory Group for the Scottish Parliament
        report: Sexualised Goods Aimed at Children (2010).
      She was a founding member of the Equalities Office 'Campaign for Body
        Confidence' which has influenced policies on health and gender and
        well-being in schools (since 2011).
    
    Ringrose has also advised many charities on these issues, as outlined
      below.
	  `Sexting': In 2011, because of her growing
      reputation as a Government adviser on childhood sexualisation, she was
      invited to lead a project for the NSPCC (R2). The research was
      launched in Parliament through invitation from Claire Perry MP and
      Equalities Minister Lynne Featherstone and was widely reported. By July 31
      2013, the report had been downloaded nearly 2000 times from the NSPCC
      website and was posted on many others. The charity re-drafted its policy
      recommendations in its wake, calling for "all professionals to receive
      training in the latest technology so that they are better equipped to deal
      with sexting" and arguing that "secondary schools and the communications
      industry should give young people better protection through education
      which promotes considerate, respectful relationships". The study's finding
      that young people would value more opportunities to discuss these issues
      with their parents helped to inform an NSPCC campaign designed to help
      parents help younger children stay safe (S9). In addition:
    
      The UK Safer Internet Centre has cited the research as critical in
        understanding how younger children are using digital media, while
        participating in the report's launch prompted the Child Exploitation and
        Online Protection (CEOP) Centre to call for research with younger
        children.
      The study is a resource on Public Health England's Child and Maternal
        Health Intelligence Network, which supports policy-makers,
        commissioners, managers and regulators.
      Vodafone's Digital Parenting website and magazine cite
        Ringrose in their `sexting' advice (S7).
      NSPCC discussed the report's findings in its submission to the Home
        Affairs Select Committee's inquiry on E-Crime (2012-13).
      Ringrose advised on the Family Lives report, All of our concern:
          commercialisation, sexualisation and hypermasculinity (2012),
        which made extensive use of the findings.
      YWCA Scotland used the research in its submission to a Scottish
        Parliamentary select committee inquiry into teen pregnancy.
      The Australian government linked to the report on its Institute of
        Family Studies website (S1).
      The study is cited in several submissions to a legal `sexting' inquiry
        in Victoria, Australia (S2).
    
    Impact on practice and resources: Ringrose's work has underpinned
    school resources, national guidance and an OU teaching film. TeenBoundaries:
    As a consultant for the UK charity Family Lives, Ringrose's body of research
    has influenced its TeenBoundaries sex and relationships education workshops,
    which have benefitted more than 7,000 young people aged 11-18. In 2012, the
    charity used the NSPCC report to re-tool its resources for schools,
    designing two new workshops to address `sexting' and pornography, "two of
    the biggest challenges facing young people in today's society", according to
    the charity (S3). By July 2013, these lessons had reached more than
    2500 students and 400 professionals attended workshops.
    National guidance: Ringrose's research helped underpin the
      first government-supported guidance for schools on `sexting', published in
      March 2013 and she was also consulted. The pack, which was prepared by
      CEOP and Securus, the manufacturer of child protection software, in
      collaboration with the DfE, Medway Council and several teaching
      organisations and charities, points to the double-standards highlighted in
      the NSPCC study (S8).
    Additional resources: The PSHE Association published a
      briefing on the NSPCC report; the Sex Education Forum (UK) cites it as a
      resource; and Optimus Education, an online hub for school leaders,
      published an extensive review of the study in its news bulletin (S10),
      recommending that its readers "download the full report and use it for
      staff meeting discussions". The report informed freelance trainer Aylssa
      Cowell's workshops, attended by some 50 teachers, social workers, youth
      workers and school nurses between July 2012 and May 2013. Cowell used the
      research to create a card game for discussing relationships and sexuality
      in a safe way. Organisations linking to the report include Digital
      Disruption, an education project promoting digital judgment skills, and
      CRUSH, a charity supporting young people suffering or at risk of domestic
      abuse. In spring 2013, teaching union ATL commissioned Ringrose and a
      colleague to help develop new video resources on `sexting', heralding the
      next generation of materials on this important topic.
    
ImpactSummary

    Jessica Ringrose's research on young people, social media and sexuality
      has helped raise awareness nationally and internationally about the
      implications of new media for young people's relationships, self-image and
      physical and emotional well-being and safety. Studying digital-age
      phenomena such as `sexting' and `slut-shaming', Ringrose has attracted
      substantial but overwhelmingly sensitive press coverage and sparked
      serious public discussion on difficult issues. She has influenced national
      and third sector guidelines on sex and relationship education and on
      internet controls and her work has underpinned resources for schools. She
      has advised on a series of government reports and inspired a very
      influential speech by Diane Abbott MP on the sexualisation of society.
    
UnderpinningResearch

    Context: Teenagers, especially girls, face contradictory
      expectations in our increasingly sexualised Western society. Digital
      technology has added to the complexity of the routes they have to
      negotiate in order to stay both `cool' and `safe'. Ringrose studies the
      way young people manage these pressures, rise above them, or are hurt by
      them. She seeks to help schools and youth services to provide sex and
      relationship education that will help them value themselves, challenge
      sexism and appreciate sex without feeling pressured. Ringrose has very
      effectively used research and consultancy opportunities, working in
      schools to research these important new areas of study.
    Children, young people and `sexting': There was little information
      on the extent or nature of `sexting' &#8212; defined as the exchange of sexual
      messages or images through mobile phones and the internet &#8212; when Ringrose
      and her colleagues began this pioneering pilot study for the NSPCC (see
      research reference R2). They showed that teenagers were more at
      risk from interactions with peers than with strangers. The cutting-edge,
      in-depth research enabled by the NSPCC project has led to a 2013 academic
      journal article (R3).
    How the research was conducted: This qualitative study is
      based on focus groups and in-depth interviews with 35 young people aged 13
      and 15 in two London schools. Researchers also mapped some of their
      activities online and interviewed teachers and other staff.
    Main findings: Schoolgirls are facing increasing pressure
      to provide sexually explicit pictures of themselves via phone or internet.
      While some girls are developing sophisticated techniques to deal with
      these pressures, others &#8212; particularly younger children &#8212; are left
      struggling to cope and unsure what to do. The `sexting' phenomenon
      revealed the wider sexual pressures girls were under. Girls could be
      pestered relentlessly for images of their bodies and to perform sexual
      acts, which might then be recorded on mobile phones and circulated,
      traded, posted or broadcast, leaving the victim to face ridicule and
      abuse. Neither boys nor girls were sure about how to navigate sexual
      communication and relationships, particularly when they became coercive,
      both online and at school. While technology amplified the age-old problem
      of double-standards in judging girls' and boys' sexual behaviour, there
      was also a blurring between online and offline sexual harassment. Young
      people felt there was silence and secrecy around `sexting' and were afraid
      of being labelled `snitches' or `snakes' if they spoke to adults. They
      uniformly asked for more support at school.
    Conclusions: Researchers called for:
    
      Clear government expectations on schools to enable discussion of
        sexual pressures and mobile technologies as part of the curriculum.
      Support and training for teachers and possible use of peer mentors.
      Safety initiatives that provide support for girls without treating
        `sexting' as a girl-only problem.
      Technology providers to make it easy to block harmful messages or
        images.
    
    Researchers: This 2012 NSPCC-funded study was led by Dr
      Jessica Ringrose, IOE. Researchers were: Professor Rosalind Gill, King's
      College, London, Professor Sonia Livingstone (LSE) and Laura Harvey (OU).
      Ringrose was made a professor in July 2013.
    Girls and the sexual politics of schooling: Ringrose's research on
      teenage girls (e.g. R4, R5) underpins the arguments set out in her
      theoretical papers and books on girlhood in a post-feminist age (R1, R4).
      Her book, Postfeminist Education? (R1), uses in-depth
      qualitative, interview-based research studies with girls aged 12-16 in
      three schools, and argues that despite widespread notions that most gender
      equality issues have been addressed in Western society, girls face
      increasing pressures around sexualisation and sexism in their peer groups,
      at school and in society. The findings show that teen girls are savvy
      producers of digital media &#8212; often "speaking back" to slut-shaming or
      other sexual bullying &#8212; but that they also need support in navigating a
      popular media context that remains rife with sexism and sexual violence.
      She holds that young sexual girlhood is being `re-victimised' and
      `re-shamed', with the girl body again the focal point of a patriarchal,
      moralising gaze. This dynamic ends up making real feminine sexual desires
      invisible in school and beyond. She argues that, rather than demonising
      girls for becoming overly `sexualised' and aggressive, educators should
      concentrate on equipping girls and boys equally with tools to develop
      healthy relationships and emotional well-being. Ringrose concludes that
      sex education needs to deal with issues such as sexual bullying, `slut
      shaming' and youth as users of pornography, "opening up spaces to discuss
      girls' own desires, in order to foster girls' bodily and sexual autonomy".
      The book offers new theoretical and methodological tools for researching
      post-feminism, girlhood and education, exploring the use of interviews and
      online observations of social networking to work with girls to understand
      how they construct online identities and relationships.
    