CaseStudyId: 44329
Title: 
    Neonatal screening: educating parents and health professionals to
        improve children's health
    

ImpactDetails

    Principal beneficiaries: Children with one of the screened-for
      conditions have gained most
      because their health needs are likely to be assessed more accurately and
      quickly than in the past.
      Parents of newborns have benefited too because they have been treated in a
      more considerate
      manner. Arguably, there is also a substantial financial saving for the NHS
      as the IOE team's work
      has reduced the likelihood of costly medical treatment and legal cases
      resulting from mistakes in
      the screening process. Dates of impact: The benefits have been
      felt throughout the REF period
      (2008-13) and are accumulating year-on-year.
    Reach and significance: The IOE team have persuaded policy makers,
      practitioners and parents
      to help them translate their research into better evidence-based policy
      and practice. In doing so,
      they have improved the quality of information resources and given parents
      a bigger input into the
      screening process. They have also helped to ensure a higher quality of
      life for many children with
      the screened-for conditions, not only in the UK but around the world. They
      have had three forms of
      impact1: instrumental (influencing policy /practice), conceptual
        (enhancing general understanding
        and informing debate) and capacity-building.
    How the impact was achieved: The immediate impact of the IOE
      team's work was on the
      UKNSPC. As the Centre's parent support research director, Oliver directly
      influenced the
      implementation of national policy. The parents' leaflets and information
      for health professionals that
      the IOE researchers produced were distributed through regional antenatal
      and child health
      screening co-ordinators, public health directors, heads of midwifery,
      health visitors, laboratory
      directors and child health record departments. This process benefited from
      the researchers'
      inclusive approach. Not only did those involved ensure that the materials
      were appropriate, they
      also encouraged their subsequent use. The materials were also made
      publicly available via the
      UKNSPC website. Their use was then promoted in articles that the
      researchers wrote for voluntary
      sector publications and practitioner journals. For example, in 2005 they
      co-authored an article for
      the Royal College of Midwives magazine, describing the new standards and
      policies (S1).
      Practitioners and parents were invited to co-author several of these
      articles to ensure they spoke
      directly to these readerships.
    Devolved administrations and overseas: Soon after the
      UKNSPC was set up, its directors,
      including Oliver, visited devolved government departments in Belfast,
      Cardiff and Edinburgh to
      engage them in its work. In 2009, Oliver visited Edinburgh again to share
      with Scottish policy-makers
      the learning that had accrued since 2002. The researchers also delivered
      presentations on
      their work to practitioners and policy-makers in Australia (e.g. the
      Victorian Health Promotion
      Foundation, Melbourne, and Queensland Health, Brisbane) in order to
      demonstrate how
      stakeholders could be involved in evidence-informed policy-making.
    Capacity building: In addition to designing training materials for
      use by others (S2), the
      researchers contributed to CPD for health professionals around the country
      (e.g. for neonatal
      nurses in Bradford, screening co-ordinators in Oxford, counsellors in
      Manchester and midwives at
      hospitals in the East and South East of England).
    Instrumental impact: Communication with parents:
      Before 2005, parents were not provided with
      impartial information on newborn screening. By 2011-12, largely because of
      the IOE team's work,
      clear, unbiased information was available to the parents of the 810,000
      babies screened and the
      1,481 who needed further diagnostic tests. It had been feared that if
      parents were told that
      screening could have disadvantages as well as advantages, many more would
      choose not to have
      their baby screened. However, this has not happened. Screening was
      declined by the parents of
      only 6 in 10,000 newborns in 2011-12 (S3).
    Discussions with midwives: As the researchers recommended,
      parents can now discuss blood spot
      screening with midwives during pregnancy and immediately before the test.
      This enables them to
      make an informed choice. At the time of the test, midwives explain the
      various research and public
      health uses of blood spots to mothers &#8212; an approach the IOE team
      advocated. The Supervisor of
      Midwives (S4) for the East Kent Hospitals University NHS Foundation
      Trust (one England's largest
      hospital trusts, serving around 759,000 people) said that they had been
      using the IOE researchers'
      leaflets for five years. "Having the leaflets makes it much easier for the
      midwives to discuss
      screening and for parents to understand the information about the range of
      conditions tested, the
      procedure itself and the risks and benefits", she said. "When providing
      mandatory training for all
      midwives on the screening and conditions we draw on the health
      professional's handbook and
      training materials [which the IOE team produced]. They are valuable
      resources to signpost if we
      have midwives who struggle to provide consistently good quality blood
      samples." A spokesperson
      for the Cambridge University Hospitals NHS Trust (S5) also
      confirmed that its midwives have been
      using the leaflets for parents since they were introduced. "They are well
      used and valued by both
      women and midwives", she said. Healthcare staff in Wales and Scotland use
      adapted versions of
      the leaflets.
    Minority ethnic mothers: Screening leaflets have been
      translated into minority languages, another
      proposal that came from the researchers. In England, information is now
      available in 18 of the
      most commonly used languages other than English.
    The changes referred to above have helped to bring about the following
      improvements:
      Timely sample collection: Most areas of the UK have seen a
      year-on-year improvement (the
      proportion of children screened at between 5 and 8 days now ranges from
      96% in Wales to 98% in
      Scotland and Northern Ireland). In England, the rate rose from 91% to 97%
      between 2006-7 and
      2011-12.
    Timely dispatch of blood spot cards: Again, the overall
      trend is upwards. In 2011-12, 96% of
      samples taken in England were received in the screening laboratory within
      four working days, an
      improvement of about 10 percentage points since 2006-7. The number of
      samples reaching the
      laboratory late (five working days or more after sample taken) has reduced
      from 14% to 4%
      between 2006-7 and 2011-12 (S6).
    Phenylketonuria (PKU): In 2011-12, 96 babies in England
      screened positive for PKU, which
      prevents the proper breakdown of an amino acid called phenylalanine. The
      great majority (95%) of
      these 96 samples were processed within three working days (compared with
      90% in 2005) and
      97% were dealt with within four working days (92% in 2005). Babies
      referred after 14 days now
      tend to have been born abroad or are very rare cases where there was a
      screening error.
    Cystic fibrosis: Dr Kevin Southern (S7), chair of
      the European Cystic Fibrosis Society neonatal
      screening working group, said it is "difficult to overstate" the impact
      that the UK screening
      programme and its information materials have had on cystic fibrosis care.
      "Children are receiving
      prompt and appropriate early care ... [the parent information documents]
      were developed in
      collaboration with the IOE (Oliver's team) and provide parents with clear
      information on very
      difficult concepts. It is a credit to the UKNSPC that these freely
      available leaflets have been used
      as a resource by many programmes around the world."
    Conceptual impact: International influence: The IOE
      team's work is also referred to on health
      information websites throughout the English-speaking world. The
      International Society of Nurses in
      Genetics (S8), for example, cites their research in its `position
      statement' on the nurse's role in
      newborn screening. It refers readers to (R5) after stating:
      "Though the risk of harm from the
      screening procedures is low, it cannot be assumed that the individual and
      societal benefits justify
      the assumption that parents should have no role in the screening process
      unless results are
      abnormal". The Health Issues Centre, a Melbourne-based body that provides
      a voice on health
      issues for communities and consumers, also cites their research (S9).
      Their work has been
      referred to in overseas medical journals that are read by doctors and
      other health professionals
      (S10) and has been translated into other languages. For example,
      the Cochrane Library offers
      Spanish and Chinese (S11) translations of their paper on the
      problematical issue of notifying
      parents that a child is a carrier of an inherited condition.
    Increased collaboration: In addition to their other
      achievements, Oliver and her colleagues have
      also demonstrated the value of adopting a collaborative approach to such
      R&amp;D work and being
      committed to genuine user-engagement. They have helped to change not only
      policy and practice
      but the culture of blood spot screening.
    
ImpactSummary

    IOE researchers have helped the NHS to maximize the number of babies in
      the UK who are
      screened for a range of serious but treatable conditions when they are
      about a week old. This
      means that more children with one of the screened-for conditions can start
      a course of treatment
      quickly. The fruits of the IOE team's work &#8212; a suite of training materials
      for healthcare staff and
      information leaflets for parents &#8212; have had another important consequence.
      They have enabled
      parents in the UK and in other countries to make much more informed
      decisions on screening than
      they could in the past.
    
UnderpinningResearch

    Context: Midwives collect blood spots from the heels of almost all
      newborn babies in the UK to
      establish whether they have an inherited health condition. In 2011-12,
      more than 810,000 babies
      were screened and 1,481 were found to have one of the five disorders that
      they were tested for:
      cystic fibrosis, phenylketonuria, congenital hypothyroidism, sickle cell
      disorders and medium-chain
      acyl CoA dehydrogenase deficiency (MCADD). As prompt treatment can often
      prevent disability or
      even death, it is essential to learn as much as possible about the best
      ways of informing, and
      consulting, parents about the tests and their results. It is also vital
      that healthcare staff are expertly
      trained in best-practice approaches. The UK has had a national neonatal
      screening programme
      since 1969 but both the programme and the ethical issues it raises have
      changed markedly over
      the past 40 years. Parents' consent to neonatal tests used to be assumed
      and commercial
      companies often sponsored leaflets on screening. Recent years have
      witnessed a growing culture
      of transparency and informed consent. One way in which the Department of
      Health reacted to
      these developments in 2002 was by commissioning the UK Newborn Screening
      Programme
      Centre (UKNSPC), a collaboration between Great Ormond Street Hospital for
      Children NHS Trust,
      the Institute of Child Health and the IOE. The UKNSPC was given
      responsibility for developing,
      implementing and maintaining a high quality screening programme for all
      newborn babies. It has
      since created a broader evidence base, largely thanks to the IOE research
      featured here.
    R&amp;D methods: The IOE team conducted two systematic reviews of
      international research into
      communication about newborn screening that were published in 2003 and
      2004, the latter (R1)
      answering questions raised by the former. Primary research included a
      survey of current practice
      in England and Wales, a qualitative study of parents' and health
      professionals' experiences of
      blood spot screening (R2 &amp; R3), and a survey of more than 100
      screening leaflets used in the UK,
      Australia and the USA (R4). Most were aimed at parents, others at
      health professionals. The
      researchers then applied the insights they had gleaned from their
      inquiries. They wrote their own
      leaflets in collaboration with parents and healthcare professionals (one
      is issued to parents before
      screening, others are given to parents if it is suspected that their baby
      has one of the five
      conditions). They produced a handbook and training materials for midwives
      and other staff
      involved in screening. The researchers also convened an advisory group:
      the Parent Information
      and Communication Working Group represented all four UK nations and
      included midwives and
      parents, a GP, health visitor, specialist nurse, geneticist and
      counsellor. Under the researchers'
      leadership, this 24-member group developed guidelines on communicating
      with parents about
      screening &#8212; during pregnancy and after birth. The guidelines were based
      largely on the
      researchers' findings but also on the group members' own experience as
      professionals or parents.
    Key findings: The researchers established that parents were being
      offered little information about
      blood spot tests and even less choice. They also found that:
    
      Parents rarely refused screening but there was no uniform procedure
        for inviting
        informed consent.
      Leaflets portrayed screening in a wholly positive light and rarely
        addressed the
        difficulties that it can entail &#8212; such as occasional `false-positive'
        results and the
        identification of family members who are carriers of genetic conditions.
      Poor communication of test results could cause parents needless
        anxiety.
      Many health professionals lacked experience or confidence in giving
        screening results
        that indicated a possible problem.
      Many parents of unaffected babies were not being told the results at
        all.
    
    The qualitative study concluded that clear, brief and accurate parent
      information and effective
      communication between health professionals and parents were needed if
      informed choice and
      public health screening for children were to co-exist successfully. The
      survey of leaflets
      recommended criteria for judging parent information.
    Researchers: Professor Sandy Oliver, Dr Katrina Hargreaves and Dr
      Ruth Stewart took the
      leading roles in this work. Oliver is the IOE's Public Engagement
      Champion. At the time of the
      research discussed in this case study Oliver was Reader in Public Policy
      while Hargreaves and
      Stewart were research officers.
    