CaseStudyId: 44323
Title: 
    Literacy and language development: working together to close the
        attainment gap
    

ImpactDetails

    Principal beneficiaries: Stuart's work benefits all children
      learning to read in English schools.
      Dockrell's work benefits the 7-10% of children in England who have speech
      and language
      difficulties, their teachers and parents, policy-makers and commissioners
      of services for such
      children. Together, their work benefits children whose language
      development lags behind their
      peers at the start of school.
    Dates of impact: Impact was at its height in 2008-9, influencing
      changes to the National Literacy
      Strategy (NLS), and 2013, with the BCRP roll-out and the 2014 National
      Curriculum's publication.
    Reach and significance: IOE research on language and literacy has
      improved educational policy
      and practice, enhancing all three waves of provision: universal, targeted
      and specialist, as
      demonstrated below. This body of work has had instrumental impact1
        &#8212; underpinning national
        guidelines and advice, and commercial tests and schemes; conceptual
          impact &#8212; changing
        accepted ideas about the nature of language learning needs; and capacity-building
          impact &#8212;
        informing ITE requirements and CPD core content. It is helping to close
        the learning gap in areas
        of high social deprivation, where more than half of children start
        nursery with delayed language.
    Literacy &#8212; impact on policy and practice: Since the 1970s, the
      place of phonics in the teaching
      of early reading has been hotly contested. Stuart has played a significant
      role in establishing a
      research-informed approach to phonics teaching for all children in
      England. The `simple view of
      reading', which she espoused (R3), is embedded in the curriculum,
      teacher education and Ofsted
      guidance. She has written and influenced many official, commercial and
      third-sector teaching and
      teacher training materials, as exemplified below. Sir Jim Rose calls
      Stuart an `unsung heroine of
      literacy' (S1).
    Rose report: Following her Tower Hamlets intervention
      studies (R1), Stuart was asked to give oral
      evidence to the Select Committee inquiry on early reading (2005), and to
      advise on Jim Rose's
      early reading review (2006). She led in drafting an appendix that proposed
      replacing the
      Searchlights model with the `Simple View' (discussed in R3; also
      see S1). The Government
      accepted all the Review's recommendations. The National Literacy Strategy
      (NLS) introduced the
      `Simple View' to schools in 2007-8; it was also incorporated into ITE and
      CPD courses. Stuart
      helped develop resources and training, including:
    
      
Letters and Sounds (DCSF 2007), a phonics teaching programme
        distributed free to all primary
        schools in England and still widely used;
      Training for Primary National Strategy (PNS) literacy consultants on
        language and reading
        development. These sessions, filmed and distributed throughout England
        as a set of training
        DVDs (2007), are also still used (e.g. S8).
    
    2014 Curriculum: Stuart helped ensure that the `Simple
      View' formed the framework for the
      teaching of reading in the final draft on 31 July 2013 (p4). The DfE's
      policy lead for English
      confirms Stuart's essential role as expert consultant (S7): "The
      papers she submitted to officials to
      support her commentary were invaluable in creating a robust rationale for
      the reading curriculum,
      and in developing officials' knowledge of the reading process, which in
      turn informed advice to
      Ministers. Her work is highly respected and admired". She played a key
      role in:
    
      Influencing the precise approach to systematic phonics;
      Extending the `Simple View' to writing;
      Influencing content on spoken language, vocabulary and spelling.
    
    The Children's Printed Word Database (R4) was used
      in developing national curricula and
      assessments in England including: a) the 2007 NLS framework, b) the
      spelling appendix for the
      2014 English Curriculum and c) the DFE's Year 1 Phonics Screening Check
      introduced in 2012.
      Stuart helped design the check and, with Professor Rhona Stainthorp of
      Reading University,
      developed a training DVD for teachers. In the commercial world, she helped
      design a reading test
      making use of the database, published by GL Assessment in 2012. The first
      normative test
      diagnosing different types of word reading problem, it garnered more than
      &#163;40,000 in sales by July
      31, 2013. Stuart ran training sessions on its use with Ark and University
      of Chester Academies.
    Dyslexia: Stuart was an expert adviser on Rose's 2008
      Dyslexia investigation. Her annex on the
      roles, responsibilities and training of specialist dyslexia teachers
      helped Rose persuade the
      Government to commission new dyslexia training materials for the National
      Strategies (S1). Stuart
      and Rea Reason of the University of Manchester provided the content of the
      resulting DfE training
      resource (2011, S4), which situated dyslexia along the continuum
      of normal development and
      embedded the `Simple View' in a whole-school approach.
    Better communication &#8212; impact on policy and practice: Dockrell's
      work has had a well-recognised
      and "highly significant" impact on policy and practice (S9),
      influencing views and
      attitudes across the speech, language and communication needs landscape
      and promoting the
      role of research in best practice (S5). Her findings on the
      damaging effect of speech and language
      difficulties on children's achievement and the lack of support they and
      their teachers received (e.g.
      R6) helped to persuade the Government to commission the influential
      Bercow Review and
      informed its findings and recommendations (2008, S3, e.g. p32), as
      National Communication
      Champion Jean Gross &#8212; appointed in the wake of Bercow &#8212; attests. She also
      played a personal
      role in triggering the review, which was commissioned in the wake of a
      meeting between Dockrell,
      Afasic's CEO, a parent and Ed Balls, then Economic Secretary to the
      Treasury (S5).
    The Government's response to Bercow was an action plan in 2008, which
      launched the Better
          Communication Research Programme (BCRP) (G4).
      Dockrell's research helped underpin all its
      recommendations &#8212; published in 2012 and accepted by the Government &#8212; but
      most explicitly those
      calling for changes to the way children are categorised and for
      individualised provision for each
      child built around family needs (R5). Education Minister Edward
      Timpson, highlighting the BCRP,
      told the Commons (Hansard 19/06/13) that the 2013 Children and
      Families Bill would replace the
      current system of School Action and School Action Plus with new guidance
      for schools to "ensure
      that they identify children with SEN more accurately". Another important
      output of BCRP was the
      Communication Supporting Classrooms Observation Tool. Dockrell led
      in developing this research-informed
      web resource to help schools ensure they have classrooms which support the
      development of language and communication skills (S6). In Lewisham,
      where the tool was piloted,
      the Speech and Language Therapy (SLT) team used it to train teachers. They
      found it offered a
      useful conceptual framework for considering the classroom environment. It
      is hosted on the
      Communication Trust website, along with the BCRP What Works
      database, on which Dockrell
      advises. The database was developed as a direct result of Dockrell's BCRP
      study examining
      commonly used interventions to support children's language (R5),
      and had 22,700 visitors between
      April and 31 July 2013 (S10). The 19 BCRP research papers,
      published on a bespoke DfE website
      in December 2012, clocked up 17,125 downloads in four months, including
      3,492 for Dockrell's
      thematic report.
    Talking Time: Dockrell and Stuart helped shape, design and
      disseminate the high-impact Every
      Child a Talker (ECAT) programme (2008) and teaching materials for early
      years, adopted in all 152
      LAs in England (S9). Informed by their `Talking Time' resource and
      research, (R2), it "led to very
      large reductions in the number of children with language delay in the
      settings which took part",
      Gross confirms. She adds: "The ECAT programme provided a model of how to
      make change
      happen on a large scale". Talking Time itself is one of only five
      universal interventions included on
      the BCRP What Works database. The Database, Talking Time and the Tool all
      had a direct
      influence on the Communication Trust's Talk of the Town programme to help
      children and young
      people with SLCN in disadvantaged areas (S10).
    
ImpactSummary

    Literacy and language work reciprocally to support children's learning
      and attainment. Professors
      Morag Stuart and Julie Dockrell, in complementary and sometimes
      co-authored work, have had a
      substantial influence on the way children of all abilities and with a
      range of needs are taught to
      read and develop their broader oral language and literacy skills. Their
      work influenced national
      programmes in England on early reading, dyslexia and spoken language
      (National Literacy
      Strategy and National Curriculum) and speech, language and communication
      needs (the Better
      Communication Research Programme). Their findings provided educational
      professionals and
      speech and language therapists with the conceptual understanding that
      underpins good practice,
      and helped equip teachers to identify difficulties and intervene.
    
UnderpinningResearch

    IOE context: Stuart and Dockrell's work sits within a rich field
      of IOE research and teaching. This
      enables a strong synergy between high quality research and practice.
      Research areas include
      children and young people with dyslexia, deafness, speech and language
      impairment (SLI),
      classroom talk and handwriting. The European Centre for Reading Recovery
      trains teachers in this
      successful method of bringing the lowest achievers at age six up to the
      standard of their peers.
      The Special Educational Needs Joint Initiative for Training (Senjit), a
      not-for-profit organisation at
      the IOE, offers specialist training for teachers of children with specific
      oral language and literacy
      difficulties.
    Early Literacy: Stuart's influential work highlighted the
      importance of phonic knowledge to
      successful early reading.
    Lessons from the Inner-city: An intervention study carried
      out in Tower Hamlets during the 1990s
      showed that after 12 weeks of systematic phonics teaching, Reception
      children made significant
      and long-lasting gains in word reading and spelling (see research
      reference R1). 112 five-year-olds,
      mainly English Language Learners (ELL), were tested before and after
      intervention, with 101
      re-tested at age seven. Although word-reading gains persisted at that
      stage, a 2004 follow-up
      showed that the children's reading comprehension was only equivalent to
      that of the control group.
      Building on their earlier work demonstrating that good spoken language is
      important for reading
      comprehension, Stuart and Dockrell developed an evidence-informed
      programme, `Talking Time'
      (R2). A quasi-experimental study showed this improved children's
      vocabulary, ability to understand
      and draw inferences from speech and to recount an incident.
    Printed Word Database: Stuart's experimental study (G2),
      showing that beginner readers need
      many more exposures to printed words than they typically received before
      they can reliably read
      them in and out of context, challenged `real books' methods of teaching
      reading current since the
      1970s. This led to development of the Children's Printed Word Database (R4),
      now an interactive
      web-based word frequency count based on books young children read in
      school. It enables
      teachers to discover which words children need to know in order to read at
      a given level, and is
      used by researchers in designing studies. Research teams from
      1993-2010 were led by Stuart
      (who moved to the IOE from Birkbeck in 1995) and Professor Jackie
      Masterson (who joined the
      IOE from Essex University in 2007).
    Simple View: With colleagues, Stuart scrutinised the
      research on how children learn to read, and
      argued that an evidence-informed framework, the Simple View of Reading
      (SV) (R3), should
      replace the National Literacy Strategy's `Searchlights' approach. SV
      highlights two interacting
      dimensions of skilled reading: word recognition and language
      comprehension.
    Speech and language difficulties: Dockrell's research over several
      decades documented the
      nature and effects of Speech, Language and Communication Needs (SLCN). It
      highlighted the
      specific ways in which language-learning difficulties damage children's
      literacy development and
      scholastic attainment, and also affect their behaviour and well-being. The
      work demonstrated the
      challenges teachers and other professionals face in mapping these
      children's needs and providing
      effective interventions. It also pinpointed `what works'.
    Language and communication needs: For study R6
      (2001), researchers interviewed teachers of 69
      children with specific language difficulties (SLD) and combined teachers'
      perspectives with
      objective assessments of individual children's needs. They found the
      teachers had inadequate
      training and support and were unaware of developmental links between poor
      language and
      problems with literacy or behaviour. Similarly, Dockrell's studies for the
      2008 Bercow Review of
        Services for Children and Young People (0-19) with Speech, Language and
        Communication Needs
        (SLCN) (2008, see impact source S3) showed that provision
      was patchy and inadequate and that
      teachers were typically unaware of SLCN and its repercussions.
    Better communication: Dockrell was a lead researcher on the
      Government's 2012 &#163;1.5m Better
      Communication Research Programme (BCRP), which published 19 reports. She
      led one of its four
      strands, analysing children's needs in relation to available provision (R5).
      A particularly significant
      finding was that resources were allocated according to children's SEN
      categories &#8212; but these did
      not identify their language learning needs. By contrast, each child's
      needs depended on their
      individual characteristics, but differentiation to meet them was not
      evident in the classrooms.
    Researchers called for individual learning programmes set within a
      three-tiered system of service
      provision: universal, targeted (about 20% of children) and specialist
      (some 2-3%). Programme:
        BCRP (2009-12). Director: Professor Geoff Lindsay (Warwick);
      Co-directors: Dockrell, Professors
      James Law (Newcastle) and Sue Roulstone (West of England). Further IOE
      expertise came from
      Professor Tony Charman, director, Centre for Research in Autism Education
      2009-12 and
      economist Professor Anna Vignoles (IOE 2003-12, now a visiting professor).
    