CaseStudyId: 44332
Title: 
    Teaching assistants: why they need to be deployed with care
    

ImpactDetails

    Principal beneficiaries:
    a) Pupils who need additional support - as they achieve more when taught
      more effectively
    b) schools, teachers and support staff - because the improved deployment
      and training resulting
      from DISS enable them to work more productively
    c) the public purse - because spending on support staff (&#163;4.1 billion in
      England's primary and
      secondary schools in 2008/9) produces better returns when they are
      carefully prepared and
      thoughtfully deployed.
    Date of impact:
    The benefits have been accruing since 2009, and INSET work is growing.
    Reach and significance:
    DISS has caused policy-makers, education bodies, inspectors, local
      authorities and schools to
      reconsider not only the deployment of support staff but provision for
      lower-attaining/SEN pupils. It
      has had an impact on thousands of schools in England and Wales and has
      influenced the thinking
      of countless SEN co-ordinators and educational psychologists - see impact
      source (S1). The
      description `ground-breaking' is over-used but this study merits the
      adjective. DISS has had two
      important types of impact, which can be categorised2
      as `instrumental' (influencing policy and/or
      practice), and `conceptual' (enhancing general understanding and informing
      debate).
    Instrumental impact:
    Influence on policy: Three months after the DISS report's
      publication its conclusions were
      endorsed by the Lamb Inquiry into parental confidence in the SEN system (S2).
      Lamb noted that
      DISS had shown "a clear relationship between support from teaching
      assistants and lower
      attainment and slower rates of progress for pupils with SEN". Two months
      later the DCSF issued
      its response to Lamb. It accepted Lamb's recommendation that the Training
      and Development
      Agency for Schools (TDA) should produce guidance on the effective
      deployment of TAs. There is,
      therefore, thanks to Lamb, an unusually clear `paper trail' between the
      DISS report's publication
      and government response to its findings. The TDA later published three
      sets of materials for
      student teachers, including a training toolkit and self-study documents,
      which refer to the study.
      Several DfE documents also highlight the DISS findings, including:
    
      
School Support Staff Topic Paper (2010), written "to inform the
        debate about the future role
        and likely impacts of support staff" &#8212; it refers to DISS 60 times (S3).
      
Breaking the link between special educational needs and low
          attainment: everyone's
          business (2010), which stresses the importance of targeted
        deployment of well-trained
        support staff (S4).
    
    DISS has since been cited in coalition government documents, including a
      2011 Green Paper on
      SEN. "Pupils with the most need can become separated from the teacher and
      the curriculum", the
      paper cautions (S5). The Government Office of the South East
      created a DISS Innovations Group
      to look at successful deployment of TAs in schools.
    Ofsted thinking: The study has also helped to shape Ofsted
      guidance for inspectors. A 2011
      briefing advises inspectors to challenge the assumption that additional
      support always improves
      the progress of pupils with SEN and says they should ask whether TAs
      always work with the
      lowest-attaining group (S6). More recently, the study's findings
      have also figured in Ofsted
      statements on the pupil premium. In September 2012, Sir Michael Wilshaw,
      the Chief Inspector,
      said he was concerned that many heads were planning to spend the extra
      money on TAs when
      research had shown that they could have a negative effect on pupil
      learning.
    SEN sector: DISS is cited in a number of documents produced
      for SEN specialists, such as the
      Autism Education Trust's Professional Competency Framework, which
      describes the knowledge,
      understanding and skills that school staff need to work effectively with
      pupils on the autism
      spectrum.
    Other influence on practitioners: The DISS team has
      developed an INSET programme to help
      schools and local authorities deploy support staff more effectively. This
      training has been delivered
      to more than 3,000 SEN co-ordinators, heads (S7) and other school
      leaders in Cambridge,
      Coventry, Berkshire, Dorset, Essex, Hampshire, Surrey, Manchester,
      Nottinghamshire and several
      London boroughs. The team has also conducted INSET sessions with
      educational psychologists,
      local authority inclusion staff, NQTs and Teach First trainees. The
      researchers published a
      handbook for schools, Maximising the impact of teaching assistants
        (Feb. 2013) which had sold
      more than 2,000 copies by July 31, 2013, and have set up a project website
      www.schoolsupportstaff.net
      that offers accessible digests of their findings. This site had received
      more than 470,000 hits by July, 2013. Many local authorities - including
      Bristol, Devon, Essex,
      Northamptonshire and Kensington and Chelsea - have increased the study's
      influence by issuing
      staff guidance that refers to its findings. Several LAs, such as
      Cambridgeshire (S8) and
      Hampshire, have changed the way they process and support statements
      of SEN because of the
      research. The IOE team also produced a schools booklet, Teaching
        Assistants: A Guide to Good
        Practice, published by Oxford University Press, which posted videos
      about the research on its
      website.
    Conceptual impact:
    DISS has raised the general level of understanding of how lower-attaining
      pupils and those with
      SEN can be helped to fulfil their potential, and how the country's huge TA
      workforce can be used
      more effectively. The researchers have provided many briefings for school
      leaders and local
      authority advisers and have given dozens of keynotes and presentations to
      seminars and
      conferences.
    Raising public awareness: The press release that the
      researchers issued to promote the final DISS
      report triggered massive media coverage. BBC Radio 4 News bulletins
      reported the findings on
      September 4, 2009, and several national dailies carried articles on the
      research. Moreover, the
      coverage was not confined to the week of the report's publication. Many
      articles in the mainstream
      and specialist media (some by the IOE researchers) have referred to its
      findings since 2009. The
      publication of the Nuffield-funded MaSt study prompted a second wave of
      national media coverage
      in February 2013, including discussions on the BBC Radio 4 Today
      programme and Jeremy Vine's
      Radio 2 show. This has helped to ensure that the IOE team's work has
      remained in the public
      consciousness.
    Take-up by opinion-formers: Several think tanks have also
      cited the study. Demos, for example,
      pointed to DISS's headline finding in a 2010 report, Ex Curricula.
      Its findings were also referred to
      in the Cambridge Primary Review (2009), which concluded: "TAs are
      no substitute for teachers"
      (S9). Jean Gross, the former Government Communication Champion for
      Children, said her thinking
      had also been influenced by DISS, which she has described as "the most
      seminal study to address
      SEN in the past decade" (S10).
    Influence on other countries: Policy-makers in France,
      South Korea, Hong Kong, Australia and
      Canada have expressed keen interest in the study. DISS is also now well
      known in Ireland and has
      been cited extensively by the National Council for Special Education
      Research, which advises the
      Irish government and provides information for parents. There are also many
      references to DISS in
      a report on special needs and classroom assistants in Ireland and Northern
      Ireland by the
      UNESCO-funded Children and Youth Programme.
    
ImpactSummary

    The landmark research project described in this case study has caused
      national policy-makers,
      education bodies, inspectors, local authorities and schools to reconsider
      the once-routine practice
      of assigning teaching assistants (TAs) to work with lower-attaining pupils
      and those with special
      educational needs (SEN). It has led to:
    
      better use of TAs (and, hence, budgets) in many UK schools
      more carefully considered joint lesson planning by teachers and TAs
      markedly improved learning experiences for many children.
    
    The study's findings are also influencing education policy thinking in
      other countries.
    
UnderpinningResearch

    The Deployment and Impact of Support Staff in Schools project (DISS) was
      undertaken by
      researchers at the IOE from 2004-9. Professor Peter Blatchford led a team
      including research
      officers Anthony Russell and Rob Webster. Their initial output was a
      series of reports for
      government funders.
    Context:
    The study was conducted during a critical phase in the growth of support
      staff numbers, following
      the workforce remodelling reforms of 2003 that were designed to reduce
      staff workload and raise
      standards. The number of teaching assistants in England's publicly-funded
      schools increased
      threefold from 79,000 (full-time equivalents) in spring 2000 to 232,300 in
      November 20121 -- partly
        because of the drive to include children with SEN in mainstream
        education.
    Key findings:
    The DISS study's principal finding was startling: the more support that
      pupils received from TAs,
      the less progress they generally made (see references R1, R2
      &amp; R4). However, the researchers
      emphasised that TAs should not be blamed. They concluded that the problem
      stems from:
    
      lack of training and professional development of TAs and teachers -
        three in four teachers
        had received no training in how to work with TAs
      limited opportunities for planning and feedback between teachers and
        TAs
      the fact that TAs had become the main educators of many
        lower-attaining/SEN pupils (R3 &amp;
        R5).
    
    The researchers found that pupils with SEN were being let down most by
      these arrangements. The
      study also revealed that, although most TAs were very dedicated, they
      tended to be more
      concerned with the completion of tasks rather than learning. Teachers
      focused primarily on the
      latter.
    Research methods:
    The DISS project was the first longitudinal study to examine the
      deployment and impact of all
      categories of support staff across primary, secondary and special schools.
      It is thought to be the
      biggest of its kind in the world. The multi-method study covered England
      and Wales and included
      all pupils receiving support, not just those with SEN. The DISS team
      analysed the impact of
      support staff &#8212; especially TAs - on teachers, teaching and learning,
      behaviour and academic
      progress. The study involved 8,200 pupils in two cohorts in seven year
      groups in 153 schools.
      Researchers observed nearly 700 pupils and more than 100 TAs, and
      interviewed more than 590
      staff and pupils. They also surveyed more than 4,000 teachers, studied
      1,670 workload diaries
      completed by support staff, and analysed more than 100 hours of classroom
      talk. The researchers
      compared the impact of different amounts of support from TAs on pupils'
      progress in English,
      mathematics and science. Sophisticated statistical analysis (multilevel
      regression models) took
      account of factors known to affect not only progress but the allocation of
      TA support, such as prior
      attainment and free meal entitlement.
    