CaseStudyId: 44333
Title: 
    Transforming lives on the Indian sub-continent: the long arm of
        education research
    

ImpactDetails

    Principal beneficiaries: Millions of the poorest children in India
      and Sri Lanka and governments
      and international donor agencies that have been able to target funding
      more effectively as a result
      of the IOE researchers' work.
    Dates of benefit: The benefits of Kingdon and Little's research
      have been felt throughout the REF
      period (2008-13).
    Reach and significance: Kingdon has improved the prospects of
      millions of disadvantaged
      children in Uttar Pradesh, an Indian state that is bigger than most
      countries (pop: c.200 million).
      She has done this by:
    
      helping to ensure that free places in private schools (25% of the
        total number of such
        places) are allocated to the poorest children
      highlighting aspects of teacher training that need to be improved (in
        the neighbouring state
        of Bihar as well as Uttar Pradesh).
    
    Little's impact on education in Sri Lanka has also been profound.
      Plantation communities and
      primary-age children have gained from government policies influenced by
      her research and from
      investment programmes that she helped to plan and implement. Both
      researchers can point to not
      only instrumental impacts1 (influencing policy and/or practice)
      but capacity-building impacts.
    India
    Instrumental impact: Kingdon's research has influenced DFID,
      policy-makers in India, and
      international organisations such as the World Bank and UNICEF.
    Advice to Select Committee: The House of Commons Select
      Committee on International
      Development drew on Kingdon's expert knowledge in January 2011 while
      considering the future of
      British aid to India. She said the UK should continue offering technical
      assistance to India and
      argued that although the cost of such aid was relatively small, it paid
      for research, "put evidence on
      the table", and thus made it less likely that policy-making would be based
      on hunch, opinion,
      ideology or political expediency (technical assistance can also entail
      monitoring and reviewing
      education programmes). Although the UK government decided in 2012 to stop
      providing financial
      aid to India from 2015 it will continue to provide technical assistance. A
      senior DFID official &#8212; see
      impact source S1 &#8212; has confirmed that Kingdon's evidence was one
      of the reasons that the
      decision to continue technical assistance was taken.
    DFID's use of research: The DFID official also said that
      Kingdon's work has made a significant
      contribution to the development of his Department's education portfolio in
      India. DFID has used her
      research to support its business cases and has cited it in internal review
      documents.
    Indian teachers: The DFID representative added that the
      SchoolTELLS study has informed
      discussions on teacher attendance that both the World Bank and his
      Department have had with
      Government of India officials. The latter expressed great interest in the
      research. In July 2008,
      Kingdon was invited to present the study's preliminary results to the then
      Joint Secretary of
      Elementary Education at the Ministry of Human Resource Development, which
      oversees India's
      schools and higher education. This led to two further invitations to
      discuss the research with senior
      Ministry officials, who then commissioned a similar UNICEF-funded study in
      five other Indian
      states, which Kingdon was unable to take part in.
    Influence in Uttar Pradesh: Kingdon made a crucial
      intervention on July 31, 2012 while sitting on
      the Uttar Pradesh working group on the implementation of India's Right to
      Education Act (2009).
      The Act decrees that children from `economically weaker' families should
      be allocated 25% of
      places in private schools, which are considered of better quality than
      state schools and cater for
      about 18 million of Uttar Pradesh's pupils (c.57% of the total). It was
      originally proposed that
      families with an annual income of up to 250,000 rupees (just over &#163;3,000)
      would qualify for these
      free places. However, having researched income levels in India (R3),
      Kingdon realised that at least
      75% of the state's population earn less than that sum. She argued
      successfully for a lower ceiling
      of 100,000 rupees, to ensure the subsidy is targeted at the poorest. This
      new ceiling has been
      applicable since December 4, 2012. The most senior official in the state's
      Department of Basic
      Education has confirmed that Kingdon helped to bring about this important
      policy change (S2),
      which means that some poor children are able to attend private schools for
      the first time &#8212; even
      elite high-fee schools. This is hugely significant as even the Uttar
      Pradesh state website
      (http://upgov.nic.in/upecon.aspx) acknowledges that "due to public apathy
      the schools are in
      disarray". It adds that privately-run schools are functional, but beyond
      the reach of many people.
      Capacity building impact: Kingdon has conducted two advanced
      workshops (December 2009
      and April 2010) for 21 senior staff at the National Council for
      Educational Research and Training
      (NCERT) &#8212; the body that advises the Indian government on education issues.
      She also presented
      a course on quantitative impact evaluation methods for 24 policy-makers
      from 17 countries at the
      Institute of Applied Manpower Research in Delhi in February 2013. Some of
      the NCERT staff that
      Kingdon trained have gone on to carry out their own quantitative impact
      evaluations of government
      education policy interventions in four Indian states. These evaluations
      have helped to promote
      cost-effective interventions and identify unproductive expenditure.
    Sri Lanka
    Little's findings have been presented to, discussed with and commented on
      by Ministry and donor
      organisations on many occasions over the past 20 years.
    Instrumental impact: Influence on donors: The World
      Bank's lead education specialist in Colombo
      (S3) says that Little's work "has been extremely useful in the
      development of policy, especially in
      primary education, education in the plantation sector, and in small
      schools" and helped the Bank to
      implement the US$70m Sri Lanka Education Sector Development Project
      (2009-11). Little has
      been very involved in the planning of the Bank's latest (2012-17) US$100m
      investment in Sri
      Lankan schooling. In fact, the Bank's representative confirmed that Little
      was "the main contributor
      to the design of support for primary education under this project". Little
      also produced an evidence-based
      case that convinced the Australian government to make a grant of Aus$37m
      for the
      establishment of a World Bank-managed trust fund to enable further money
      to be channelled to Sri
      Lankan education. This is not the only substantial grant that Little has
      secured for the country. Her
      deep, research-based knowledge of education in Sri Lanka also enabled her
      to write the design
      document for the establishment of the national education research centre,
      funded by the World
      Bank and based at the University of Colombo since 2000.
    Primary education: Traditionally, primary schooling has not
      been a separate stage of education in
      Sri Lanka. It has been an integral part of general education (Grades
      1-13). This has exacerbated
      the status and resource problems of primary education. However, in the
      recent past &#8212; largely
      thanks to Little's urging &#8212; the Ministry has accorded a separate section
      and, crucially, budget line
      for primary schooling within its national education plan. The budget line
      proposal came out of the
      2000-2005 plan for primary education, whose drafting team Little led
      (under a DFID-supported
      project). Little's book, Primary Education Reform in Sri Lanka
      (2000), has also been very
      influential. A former director of primary education in the Ministry of
      Education (S4) said that the
      book was translated into Sinhala and Tamil and distributed to education
      officials. "Thoughts shared
      in this book formed the basis for many policy proposals related to
      development of primary
      education between 2006 and 2010," he confirmed.
    Plantation schools: This retired Ministry of Education
      director said that Little's 1999 book,
      Labouring to Learn, had also helped to shape government programmes
      that have supported
      education in the plantations since the 1990s. Her work had highlighted the
      magnitude of the
      teacher shortage in plantation schools and convinced policy-makers that
      they should prioritise this
      issue, he said. It had also provided the rationale for additional funding
      of disadvantaged schools in
      remote plantations. The Minister for Tamil Education on the Central
      Provincial Council (S5) said
      that Labouring to Learn, which was also translated into Sinhala
      and Tamil, is regarded as a
      "treasure" by the plantation community. He added that Little has
      "contributed tremendously" to the
      development of primary schools in plantation areas.
    Technical advice: Little has also drafted highly-valued
      technical documents for Sri Lanka's
      education planners. Her guideline for preparing medium and long-term
      provincial plans is used by
      planners at national, provincial and zonal levels. Officials have
      confirmed that she also made
      important academic and technical inputs to the Ministry of Education's
      2012-16 plan.
    Capacity building: Labouring to Learn also provides key
      reference material for BEd, DipEd and
      MEd students at the University of Colombo. Little's publications on
      primary and multigrade
      education &#8212; and the curriculum materials she has produced &#8212; are used by
      the university's DipEd
      students.
    
ImpactSummary

    The IOE researchers featured in this case study have had a major and
      sustained impact on
      education in the Indian sub-continent. Geeta Kingdon has shaped UK
      government policy on
      educational aid to India. She has also helped to ensure that millions of
      poor children in Uttar
      Pradesh &#8212; India's most populous state &#8212; qualify for free places in private
      schools. Angela Little's
      work in Sri Lanka has raised the profile of primary education, which has
      been hampered by low
      status and inadequate funding. She has also done much to improve the life
      chances of the
      country's disadvantaged children &#8212; particularly those growing up on tea
      plantations.
    
UnderpinningResearch

    Context: The IOE has influenced national education policies in
      India and Sri Lanka since the
      1920s, and has helped to train large numbers of the sub-continent's school
      leaders and other
      education professionals. Ninety years on, the IOE is continuing to support
      the development of
      education systems in these two countries &#8212; and to learn from them. The
      ambition that drives IOE
      work in the sub-continent, and the two researchers featured in this case
      study, is the increase of
      access to good quality learning among the poorest and most marginalised
      children &#8212; see reference
      R1.
    India: Geeta Kingdon is Chair of Education Economics and
      International Development at the IOE
      and is also President of City Montessori School, Lucknow &#8212; the biggest
      school in the world, with
      47,000 students. Her research focuses on returns to education, low-fee
      private schools, the role of
      unions, and teacher performance.
    Key findings: Study 1: One influential research
      project that Kingdon directed has highlighted low
      teacher competence and high rates of teacher and pupil absence in two of
      India's poorest states &#8212;
      Uttar Pradesh and Bihar. The School Teacher Effectiveness and Learning
      Level of Students
      (SchoolTELLS) study (R2) &#8212; found low levels of subject-matter
      knowledge among teachers, both in
      literacy and numeracy. Only 25% of teachers could solve a basic percentage
      problem designed for
      10 and 11-year-olds. The researchers recommended that in-service teacher
      training should identify
      weaknesses and help improve skills, rather than punishing under-performing
      teachers. Study 2:
      Research into `para' (contract) teachers that Kingdon undertook (R3)
      enabled her to acquire a
      detailed knowledge of earnings levels and income distributions in Indian
      states. This information
      later proved crucial as she used it to influence a key school-place
      allocation decision in Uttar
      Pradesh (see Section 4 of this case study).
    Research methods: Study 1: Researchers led by
      Kingdon and Dr Rukmini Banerji, research
      director of Pratham, India's largest NGO, made unannounced visits to 160
      schools in Uttar
      Pradesh and Bihar (80 in each state) between July 2007 and May 2008. Each
      school was visited
      four times. The study tested the competence of 800 teachers and the
      attainment of 4,300 pupils.
      The statistical analysis was carried out between July 2008 and September
      2009. Study 2: In 2009,
      Kingdon analysed National Sample Survey data for India, looking at wages
      of regular and contract
      teachers. Her co-researcher was Vandana Sipahimalani-Rao, an education
      economist and
      independent consultant.
    Sri Lanka: Angela Little was Professor of Education and
      International Development at the IOE
      from 1987 to 2010 (she has been a professor emerita since January 1,
      2011). Little has produced
      a huge body of research on education in Sri Lanka. Between 1993 and 1995,
      she conducted action
      research in plantation schools (R4). She has also acted as an
      adviser to the Sri Lankan Ministry of
      Education &#8212; contracted through the Department for International
      Development (1998-2002) or the
      World Bank and the Australian Government Overseas Aid Programme
      (2009-2013).
      Key findings: Little's research has created awareness of the
      importance of treating primary
      education as a separate and foundational stage of education (R5),
      of giving attention to the needs
      of small schools and of investing in the education of Sri Lanka's
      plantation communities.
    Methods: Her research on plantation communities involved analysis
      of historical and
      contemporary policy documents and education records, interviews with
      countless teachers,
      principals, parents, students, education officers, plantation managers,
      trade union representatives
      and politicians and many hours of classroom observation. Her work on
      primary education
      employed similar techniques.
    