CaseStudyId: 44331
Title: 
    Making Games: empowering pupils to design their own digital games
    

ImpactDetails

    Reach and significance: MissionMaker represents a new
      model of educational software, in which young people learn about
      digital media, not just through it. It is enhancing digital and cultural
      literacy in hundreds of schools on four continents. The Making Games
      research has also helped to influence policy-makers, who took a keen
      interest in its design, and has pioneered a more collaborative method of
      games design.
    Beneficiaries: young people in schools and out-of-school contexts,
      video games industry, education and technology policy-makers, cultural
      institutions.
    Dates of impact: 2008-13, with the software's launch and build-up
      of sales.
    Impact on policy and national thinking: Becta (the former IT
      quango) was closely involved with Making Games, playing a role on its
      advisory committee. As a result, Becta revised its policy for ICT in
      schools, allowing the purchase of higher-specification PCs that can handle
      the demands of gaming environments &#8212; see ESRC evaluation, impact source (S1).
      The researchers have participated in policy-related workshops and
      conferences, and liaised with communications regulator Ofcom. In 2009,
      Futurelab commended MissionMaker in its influential report, Digital
        Participation, Digital Literacy and School Subjects, and cited
      Burn's work. MissionMaker is endorsed in Scotland's Curriculum
        for Excellence (S2). Consolarium, a national centre for games
      and learning, supports teachers in its use.
    Commercial impact: By 2013, MissionMaker had been licensed
      to some 1000 users, mainly schools and city learning centres, and by 2013
      its sales amounted to an estimated &#163;700,000 (based on figures provided by
      Immersive).
    Product development: Making Games also provided a new model
      of industrial design for the games and educational software sector: a
      partnership between software publisher and academics, with students and
      teachers serving, in effect, as co-designers, a process commended in the
      ESRC's evaluation. This model continued into a partnership with
      Shakespeare's Globe, extending the design to MissionMaker to allow
      pupils to make games based on Macbeth (2012). In late 2012, the IOE
      purchased Immersive Education's four educational software products, Kar2ouche,
      Krucible, Mediastage and MissionMaker. This has
      enabled researchers to embark on a new phase of R&amp;D. By the end of the
      REF period they had begun developing new versions of its software through
      funded research, and were preparing to bring subsequent products to market
      under the name Magical Projects.
    Engagement with industry: Researchers have been asked to
      take on a number of consultancy and advisory roles since Making Games
      ended. Burn was adviser to the Interactive Software Federation of Europe
      (the games industry's European association) from 2006-10, and gave
      keynotes at two of their annual conferences.
    Gender: Making Games contributed to a change in thinking in
      the games industry that saw a rise in games for families in place of
      `girly' products. Pelletier took part in a 2006 US National Science
      Foundation conference bringing together academics and industry
      representatives, titled Beyond Barbie and Mortal Kombat. Along
      with a subsequent book (R3) it helped dispel myths about gender and
      games.
    Impact on practice: In a document reviewing game-based learning
      published in March 2010, Becta said MissionMaker allows pupils "to
      learn about the literacy of games design (e.g. narrative structure, rules
      systems, designing for audience) whilst developing their problem-solving,
      value judgment, negotiating and decision-making skills" (S3).
    Use in schools: By 2013, nearly 1000 schools were using MissionMaker.
      Ready-made classroom activities mapped to England's national curriculum
      and exam syllabuses have included: Media Studies KS3; Teacher Notes for
      the Gifted and Talented MissionMaker Developing Cognitive Skills
      course (KS2) plus Gifted and Talented Workbook; and Fairy Tale Detective
      games. Teachers have created their own packages, such as Focus on Games
      KS3; written by Bedfordshire middle school teachers, it provides
      suggestions for 10 weeks' work. Many teachers have used social-networking
      sites such as YouTube to share &#8212; or pick up &#8212; suggestions on how the tool
      can be applied in the classroom. One YouTube video, with some 2,500 views
      by the end of July 2013, shows how MissionMaker can be used to
      teach children about health and safety (S4). Teachers have also
      found out about MissionMaker's usefulness through the education
      press (S5) and Teachers TV &#8212; it featured in two programmes, along
      with commentary by international experts on games and literacy. English
      teachers have learnt about MissionMaker's support of wider
      literacy on the National Association for the Teaching of English website.
      In 2011-12, the ICT coordinator of Burnt Oak Primary School in Sidcup
      reported that using MissionMaker with Year 6 improved
      relationships and that the need for precision and logic had a knock-on
      effect on thinking and writing skills (S6). `Kimberley' and
      `Nathalie', Y6, reported: "The best thing about MissionMaker is it
      allows us to use our imagination. You have to think hard about who the
      game is for and work out rules". Out of school, it features in activity
      centre programmes (S7).
    Endorsement by examination boards: A teaching programme
      built around MissionMaker, Games, Game Engines and Design, has
      been endorsed by the OCR examination board for use towards its
      Certificate/Diploma in iMedia. MissionMaker has also been included
      in the Moderators' Toolkit for the EdXcel Diploma in Digital Applications
      course as an appropriate tool to use in the game-making modules.
    Work with young offenders: In 2009 Sheffield Youth
      Offending Service developed a programme using MissionMaker to
      re-engage truants and students in pupil referral units through educational
      gaming sessions. The Service subsequently reported that young people
      remained focused and "progressed to the point where they took ownership of
      their games-making and tried out their own ideas". The organisers of this
      programme ran training sessions for teachers and argued that it has
      "powerful" potential to address issues relating to actions and their
      consequences (S8).
    Career development: The Computer Games Skills Forum has
      said that projects such as MissionMaker should be supported
      wherever possible (S9). It believes that games-authoring software
      encourages more young people to consider careers in its industry. The
      Scottish Government has reached a similar conclusion, explicitly linking
      its ICT curriculum and the use of software such as MissionMaker
      with the future of the games industry (S2).
    International impact: The Making Games project has been featured
      in keynote addresses at international conferences, media literacy seminars
      and teachers' conferences in Europe, the US, Australia and New Zealand. MissionMaker
      is being used in the US, Australia, Hong Kong, Finland, Germany, New
      Zealand and Denmark. Pelletier has advised the OECD and the Norwegian
      government on gender, equity and the IT industry. In 2009, Singapore
      established a National 3D Game Building Competition for schools, using the
      IOE tool, to raise awareness that computer games can be engaging
      learning tools. This competition, now called the National 3D Serious Play
      Competition, is also seen as supporting the country's efforts to become a
      regional hub for interactive games development. More than 100 teams
      participate each year (S10). The use of MissionMaker in
      Singapore, which is in the vanguard of ICT-in-education developments, is a
      particularly clear demonstration of the Making Games project's
      international impact.
    
ImpactSummary

    MissionMaker is an innovative tool developed by IOE researchers in
      partnership with a software publisher which allows children and young
      people to make sophisticated 3D computer games without having programming
      knowledge. It has expanded thinking about games as an art form and
      children's ability to make and understand their structures, and has
      challenged stereotypes about games as `gendered' toys. It is endorsed by
      examination boards and used in hundreds of schools and centres throughout
      the UK and internationally. Designed in consultation with pupils and
      teachers, it encourages creative and strategic thinking in the English and
      Media curriculum in respect of games, which have received scant attention
      in school curricula.
    
UnderpinningResearch

    Context: Making Games, the focus of this case study, and the
      project which created MissionMaker, is part of a continuum of IOE
      research, starting with Gunther Kress's ground-breaking work in the 1980s
      and 1990s on social semiotics, and building on internationally significant
      work on media education by David Buckingham (see research reference R2),
      on adventure and role-playing games by Carr et al (2006) and on multimodal
      media texts made by and for young people. The Centre for the Study of
      Children, Youth and Media, in which the researchers were based,
      specialised in media education and young people's engagement with media
      cultures and their media production.
    MissionMaker: The Making Games researchers identified a need for
      software that would enable young people to design and produce computer
      games (R1). They also recognised the educational potential of such
      a tool. Together with industry partner Immersive Education, they spent
      three years developing software that would allow young people to make 3D
      adventure and puzzle games that are as satisfying to play as the ones they
      buy. The research focused on game design as an extension of literacy,
      specifically `media literacy'. The underlying argument is that while we
      teach through educational media, we also teach about the media in young
      people's lives; gaming is as valid a study area as other cultural forms
      such as film and television (R2, R3).
    Key achievements: The software broke new ground by
      simplifying the design of complex adventure games in two ways. It
      contained a `rule editor', which allowed young people to specify the
      conditions under which any event in their game would happen as a simple
      sequence, such as "if the key is clicked, the door opens". The 3D
      environments, objects and characters were pre-designed so children could
      select characters, sets and objects from `libraries'. But they also had to
      ensure that their rules worked in concert, and needed to understand game
      structure. Users could also import their own graphics, dialogue, music and
      videos. The researchers defined the areas of knowledge that pupils need to
      acquire, such as the conceptual understanding of the conventions of game
      design, the way games target different audiences in specific ways and the
      commercial and regulatory aspects of game design. Their model of
      game-literacy was then used to create materials to accompany the software.
      Gender: Researchers explored whether boys and girls used games in
      stereotypical `gendered' ways. Their findings overturned prior beliefs
      about the relationship between gender and game play.
    Research methods: The three years' funding (2003-6) enabled
      the researchers to work with developers at Immersive Education to create
      successive prototypes, which were evaluated with pupils and media teachers
      at UK schools. This ensured that the software reflected the interests and
      purposes of its intended market. The project also developed methods for
      working with end-users - specifically children - in the development of
      software, and demonstrated its benefits. Such methods included videotaped
      observation, semi-structured interviews, design workshops and analysis of
      the games produced by the students. Immersive Education contributed the
      software engineering, visual design and animation expertise, working to
      the research priorities of the IOE team.
    Researchers: Professor David Buckingham (left IOE 12/2011),
      Professor Andrew Burn and Dr Caroline Pelletier.
    Earlier projects: A 2001-3 IOE study, Textuality and video
        games: Interactivity, narrative space and role play (R4), was
      one of the inspirations for Making Games. Researchers examined the rules
      systems, narrative elements, and imaginary worlds that role-play games
      establish. They also studied their visual characteristics and the forms of
      engagement they invite from players. The project's co-directors,
      Buckingham and Burn, and researcher Diane Carr, interviewed players,
      recorded play sessions, and spoke with game producers. They analysed a
      wide range of secondary texts, mostly from the games world's fan
      communities. Theoretical underpinning for Making Games comes from
      Buckingham's theories of media literacy (R2, arguing that media
      studies should focus not only on analysing media texts but also creating
      them), developed further during the project (see R1); and theories
      of multimodal communication, building on the work of Kress and others, and
      applied here to games (R5). Kress's much-cited co-authored book, Multimodal
        discourse: the modes and media of contemporary communication (2001),
      outlines a theory of communication for the age of interactive multimedia
      and multi-skilling.
    