CaseStudyId: 44330
Title: 
    Rapid response reports: a quick but rigorous service for policy-makers
    

ImpactDetails

    Principal beneficiaries and dates of impact: Politicians and civil
      servants and, by corollary, children in England, especially those with
      health, social and/or economic disadvantages. Impact occurred throughout
      the REF period, but 2011-12 was a high point, as the influential `family
      breakdown' research fed into a string of policies.
    Reach and significance: TCRU's rapid response reports have
      informed government policy on health, families and children for more than
      a decade. The range of areas covered is extensive. Examples include a
      scoping study on FE students' mental health and wellbeing; a literature
      review on improving access to psychological therapies for children and
      young people, and a briefing paper on international perspectives on social
      work. As the evidence below shows, the reports have had considerable
      `instrumental' impact1 (influencing the development of policy or
        practice) and `conceptual' impact (enhancing understanding or informing
        debates).
    The rapid response programme as a whole:
      What distinguishes rapid response work from other policy-relevant research
      is the ability to provide high quality information at relative speed (from
      two weeks to several months) and the relationships of collaboration and
      trust built up with government officials &#8212; an important impact in itself.
      The rapid response programme has helped to change attitudes among
      policy-makers, raising expectations about the value of research in
      policy-making and encouraging `joined-up' education and health research
      agendas (many studies have brought together policy-makers in joint
      advisory groups). Richard Bartholomew, chief research officer at the DfE
      (see impact source S2), said the responsive mode's speed and
      quality enabled his Department to commission "very urgent pieces of
      original research to inform live policy debates", overcoming the major
      problem of the "very different speeds of the policy and the research
      cycles". Statham's intellectual leadership and understanding of how to
      relate research to policy questions underpinned the mode's success, he
      said, adding that it was so popular with policy colleagues that "we have
      often had to turn down some requests because of overload". The
      relationship between the reports' authors and government makes the process
      of conveying findings to the policy-makers who most need to hear them much
      less haphazard. For example, in 2008 Professor Smith was asked to speak
      about the findings on family breakdown to a policy seminar attended by 60
      representatives of the DCSF, Home Office, Treasury, Ministry of Justice,
      DH and Department for Work and Pensions.
    Childhood Wellbeing Research Centre: By 2009, when the IOE
      won a &#163;2m DfE contract to establish the Childhood Wellbeing Research
      Centre (CWRC) in collaboration with the Universities of Loughborough and
      Kent (January 2010-March 2014), the value to government of rapid response
      reports was firmly established. The specification of all the new Policy
      Research Programme centres commissioned by the Departments for Education
      and Health required that a substantial proportion of the budget be
      allocated to providing this facility. The CWRC itself can be seen as an
      `impact' of the earlier work. It carries out rapid response studies, and
      its expertise in methodology as well as subject matter enables it to
      provide evidence to underpin government-commissioned reviews and to do
      joint work with DfE analysts. The CWRC provided evidence for the Bailey
      Review on commercialisation and sexualisation of childhood, which (as
      Richard Bartholomew confirms) formed the basis for recommendations on how
      the retailing and entertainment sectors could work with government and
      parents to reduce the risks to children (S2). It also conducted an
      international evidence review that helped policy-makers develop the role
      of the Children's Commissioner for England by providing clear examples of
      models used in other countries which could be adapted (S2).
    Illustrative study: Family breakdown and children's wellbeing:
      This TCRU report has helped support arguments for fairer taxation of
      single-parent families and policies aimed at promoting better
      relationships within families before and after breakdowns occur. It
      concluded that policies which focus on supporting mothers' mental health,
      facilitating cooperative parenting and communication, encouraging good
      parent-child relationships, and reducing financial hardship can help to
      maximise positive child outcomes following parental separation. These
      findings have proved very influential. Even before publication, the report
      heavily informed a 2008 Cabinet Office Strategy Unit/DCSF paper, Families
        in Britain: an evidence paper. It was subsequently cited in a number
      of government publications and had a direct impact on several important
      policy decisions. For example, the government &#8212; using TCRU's evidence
      about the importance of relationship quality and stability &#8212; committed
      &#163;30m over four years to provide relationship support for couples, &#163;20m
      over three years to help separated and separating parents to work together
      in the best interests of their child and &#163;10m on legal aid for family
      mediation (S3, pp15-18). The TCRU study is also cited in the:
    
      Equality and Human Rights Commission's Parliamentary briefing on the
        Equality Bill, 2010 (supporting non-discriminatory taxation of
        single-parent families) (S4).
      DWP's 2011 impact assessment of proposals on child maintenance.
      Child Maintenance and Enforcement Commission's Delivery Plan 2011/12
        (the findings are used to argue that parents should be encouraged to
        make family-based arrangements for children before resorting to the
        courts).
      Social Security Advisory Committee's response to the coalition
        Government's 2010 consultation paper, Tackling Child Poverty and
          Improving Life Chances. (The Committee pointed to the finding that
        children thrive in families characterised by consistent care.)
      DfE's Families in the Foundation Years (2012), which set out
        the government's vision for early healthcare and education (S5,
        section on Encouraging Independence).
    
    The study attracted extensive press coverage and links to the report can
      now be found on the websites of organisations such as Gingerbread, One
      Plus One (S10), Against Violence and Abuse, and the Centre for
      Social Justice. Through its impact on policy-making, this research brought
      potential benefit for all children and families experiencing relationship
      breakdown.
    Illustrative study: Review of the Delivery of the National Child
        Measurement Programme (NCMP): TCRU conducted two studies on the
      NCMP. The first, a 2009 rapid response study of how height and weight
      measurements were being fed back to parents, identified concerns about the
      potential to stigmatise overweight children. It led to changes being made
      to the DH templates for feedback letters. These changes have improved the
      information received by all parents. The 2011 review of the national
      delivery of the programme was built on the earlier study. It took stock of
      progress and challenges since the NCMP's launch in 2005, and reflected on
      how it could be improved. DH officials later praised the report's "quality
      and timeliness" and confirmed that the DH was already taking action to
      address some of the delivery issues highlighted (S6). Key
      recommendations that influenced the 2012-13 national guidance for local
      providers of the programme (S7) included those on the need for
      further explanation and debate about NCMP's purpose. This reflected
      concerns that professionals had raised with the researchers that the NCMP
      was changing from a monitoring to a screening programme. The guidance also
      echoed the TCRU report's conclusion that local authorities and the general
      public needed to be made more aware of the programme. Through its impact
      on the feedback letters and guidelines, this study brought potential
      benefit to all families with primary children in Reception and Year 6.
    Illustrative study: Promoting the Health of Looked-after Children:
      Commissioned by the DH to inform statutory guidance in 2009, this IOE
      report was published alongside that guidance on the DCSF's Healthy Care
      Programme website (it is now on the National Children's Bureau website,
      along with an NCB briefing on corporate parenting citing the study [S8],
      and in the national archives [S9]). Recommendations arising from
      the study's fieldwork were incorporated into the statutory guidance. An
      example at a strategic level was the importance of Joint Strategic Needs
      Assessments taking into account the health requirements of looked-after
      children, and at an operational level the need for better communication
      when a child is placed with carers outside their local authority. Through
      its impact on the government guidance this research brought potential
      benefit to all looked-after children.
    
ImpactSummary

    Rapid response reports, commissioned from the IOE's Thomas Coram Research
      Unit (TCRU) by the Departments for Education and Health specifically to
      inform policy-making, have helped to determine the financial and practical
      support for disadvantaged families and children in England for more than a
      decade. This important series of reports has achieved impact not only by
      producing robust findings that government departments can rely on but by
      building relationships of trust and mutual understanding between national
      policy-makers and researchers.
    
UnderpinningResearch

    The approach: In 2000, TCRU began pioneering a new way for
      academic research groups to work with government, led by Professor June
      Statham. The approach allowed politicians and civil servants to have quick
      access to evidence that could inform decision-making, and to
      scientifically rigorous scoping work to inform new policy directions. It
      also provided a single point of contact giving government access to a wide
      pool of relevant research knowledge. The rapid response reports have drawn
      on TCRU's wealth of research into support for children and families (e.g.
      research references R1 &amp; R2), but have also benefited
      from researchers' individual expertise. Working closely with policy-makers
      has made it possible to negotiate the best way of addressing their
      immediate needs for evidence, and to agree what would be feasible within
      often tight time frames. Other factors supporting this way of working
      were:
    
      Sensitivity to constraints facing policy-makers, including short
        timescales to respond to ministerial requests;
      Flexibility in response to unexpected policy developments.
    
    Breadth of work: TCRU has completed nearly 50 rapid response
      projects since 2003. Their themes overwhelmingly relate to child and
      family welfare, and encompass issues such as adoption, foster care, family
      justice, child protection, childcare, children's rights, children with
      disabilities, mental health and Black and ethnic minority children. The
      work typically comprises small-scale studies (including, for example,
      literature reviews, secondary data analysis or costing exercises), as well
      as scoping exercises, that bring together evidence in a new field, and
      feasibility studies to test the ground before the roll-out of large-scale
      research or development work. It also encompasses more direct input to
      policy debate and development &#8212; including, for example, analysis to inform
      ministerial briefings and the development of national guidance and
      guidelines. This case study focuses on the underpinning concept and
      methodology of these reports as well as a small selection of high impact
      rapid response studies published since 2008.
    Illustrative rapid response reports:
      Family breakdown: The high quality evidence analysed for
      this 2009 Department for Children, Schools and Families (DCSF) review (R3)
      helped to dispel some myths about single-parent families and challenged
      the assumption that family breakdown is always harmful for children. The
      evidence showed that family functioning, rather than family type, made a
      difference and that family breakdown is a process, not a one-off event.
      The review built its authority on a large body of work by Professor
      Marjorie Smith.
    Methods: This report drew primarily on review-level
      evidence; key texts were supplemented by others identified through
      targeted searches of bibliographic databases and the Internet.
    National Child Measurement Programme (NCMP): This 2011
      evaluation of the delivery of the NCMP (R4) showed that the
      programme had provided much-needed evidence on the scale of the childhood
      obesity problem and had allowed targets to be set to address it. The
      report pointed to areas for improvement and suggested how the NCMP could
      be adapted in response to new structures proposed for public health
      services.
    Methods: This report was based on document analysis,
      interviews with key stakeholders and an online survey of professionals
      across England.
    Health of looked-after children: This study (R5)
      provided an evidence base to help DCSF and the Department of Health (DH)
      revise national health guidance on looked-after children. It investigated
      the gap between guideline requirements and existing practice, and
      identified good practice.
    Methods: This report included interviews with key
      stakeholders and an overview of research and statistics.
    