CaseStudyId: 44356
Title: 
    Novel brain imaging methods improve neurosurgical treatment for epilepsy
    

ImpactDetails

    Use of approach in clinical practice
    The underpinning research described above has enabled clinicians to
      reveal abnormalities causing refractory epilepsy that were not previously
      identifiable, presenting a target for surgical treatment. This results in
      increased access to potentially curative neurosurgery. Functional MRI and
      tractography approaches that we pioneered are now used by neurosurgeons
      throughout Europe (particularly Zurich and Bonn) to identify the risks of
      surgery in individuals, and to plan the surgery so that risks may be
      reduced [a].
    Surgeons use tractography to visualise pathways of white matter fibres in
      the brain in the pre-operative MRI scans. The system is used on roughly
      one patient a week and it has been fully operational since mid-2012,
      although a preliminary version was in clinical use for about a year prior
      to that. The system helps surgeons avoid damaging nerve fibre pathways,
      which can otherwise lead to visual deficits that would, for example,
      prevent driving. An early evaluation of the system demonstrated its impact
      by using the system in 21 patients undergoing anterior temporal lobe
      resection. The outcomes were compared to a control group who underwent the
      same surgery without the system. None of those who had their visual
      pathway displayed to the surgeon via the tractography system had a visual
      field deficit that would prevent driving, compared to 13% in the control
      group. The experiment shows preservation of vision in the patients
      operated on using the system [ref].
    As of mid-2013, around 140 patients have benefited from surgery at NHNN
      performed using tractography, which has been of critical importance for
      improving the precision and safety of neurosurgical treatment [b].
    As well as informing decisions about whether to undertake surgery or not,
      scans are also used in the interventional MRI operating theatre during
      surgery. A 3-dimensional map of critical brain areas can now be visualised
      and presented to the surgeon as the operation proceeds, to enable the
      guiding of the surgery away from critical areas that must be avoided. This
      enhancement is already used in clinical practice at the National Hospital
      for Neurology and Neurosurgery, resulting in safer surgery with reduced
      risk of causing new deficits.
    Individual patient benefit and public engagement
    A specific example of the dramatic impact of this technology was of a
      28-year-old man with severe epilepsy that was not controlled by
      medications. The nature of the epileptic seizures and the EEG recordings
      suggested that their source was on the left side of the brain, towards the
      front. Standard MRI scans were unremarkable, but a computerised analysis
      identified an abnormal area approximately 2cm by 1cm in the middle frontal
      gyrus. Functional MRI scans showed that this was a few millimetres above
      areas involved in language, and abutted parts used to control the use of
      the right upper limb. Tractography showed that the corticospinal tract,
      which carries command and control information to the limbs, ran within a
      few millimetres of the abnormal area. Large veins were directly over the
      abnormal area. These data allowed the precise positioning of recording
      electrodes in and around the abnormal area to pinpoint the site of seizure
      onset. This led to precise surgical removal of the part of the brain that
      was giving rise to the seizures, with the consequence that no further
      seizures have occurred, medication has been withdrawn, and the patient is
      going to college [c]. For these individuals, the impact of our
      research is thus immediate and life changing.
    A further example is that the 3D representation of the optic radiation,
      which carries visual information from the eye to the brain, can be
      displayed in the eyepiece of the operating microscope, so the surgeon
      knows where this structure is, and the surgery can be designed to avoid
      this pathway, and the risk of damaging vision averted.
    Our improvements to surgery have had a huge impact on the lives of
      patients treated. One such example was featured on the 2010 BBC One
      programme "How Science Changed Our World" [d]. Emma, an
      18-year-old girl, had surgery to treat epilepsy that had previously meant
      she suffered from up to eight seizures per day. After the surgery she no
      longer suffered from seizures and her quality of life was immeasurably
      improved.
    New clinical procedures
    The use of fMRI for testing language retention has entirely replaced the
      carotid amytal test at the National Hospital for Neurology and
      Neurosurgery, with benefits to patients and health providers. The old,
      more expensive test could be dangerous, involved radiation and required a
      two-day hospital stay. The hospital used to carry out around four such
      procedures per month, but have done none since 2004, with the benefits to
      patients continuing throughout the REF impact period. The fMRI method has
      been widely adopted in epilepsy surgery centres around the world [e].
    NICE guidelines
    The Institute of Neurology's focus on MRI applied to epilepsy contributed
      to the development of epilepsy imaging protocol guidelines by the
      International League against Epilepsy, between 1998 and 2011 [f, g, h].
      These underpinned the imaging guidelines for epilepsy that were used in
      the NICE epilepsy guidelines of 2004 and 2012 [i], which
      recommended that neuroimaging should be used to identify structural
      abnormalities that cause certain epilepsies. MRI is particularly important
      in those in whom seizures continue in spite of first-line medication. In
      both 2004 and 2012, Duncan was a member of the NICE guideline development
      group.
    
ImpactSummary

    Recent advances in MRI brain scanning developed at the UCL Institute of
      Neurology have underpinned major improvements in the surgical treatment of
      epilepsy. Information about the location of critical brain structures,
      such as the optic radiation that carries visual signals, and language
      areas of the brain, are used to identify the risks of neurosurgery in
      specific individuals. This helps to inform patient choice and to reduce
      the risk of loss of any part of the visual field or language when
      performing the surgery. UCL's pioneering use of these imaging techniques
      during surgery, with correction of the movement of the brain that occurs
      during surgery, showed that this approach reduced the occurrence of
      serious loss of vision to zero. This information is now used in epilepsy
      surgery every week at the National Hospital for Neurology and Neurosurgery
      and is being rolled out to other centres.
    
UnderpinningResearch

    Epilepsy is one of the most common serious brain disorders, affecting
      over 450,000 people in the UK. One third of these individuals continue to
      have seizures despite anti-epileptic drug treatment. For those in whom the
      source of epilepsy can be pinpointed in the brain, neurosurgical treatment
      can be curative. Over the last 20 years, research at the UCL Institute of
      Neurology, led by Professor John Duncan, has optimised brain imaging
      applied to epilepsy surgery, with numerous publications on qualitative and
      quantitative imaging, and the application of automated voxel-based
      analytical techniques to increase the yield of detection of abnormalities.
      In the last decade, we developed methods to quantitatively analyse scans
      that show increased sensitivity to subtle abnormalities that are not
      evident on traditional visual inspection by radiologists [1].
    We have further optimised the clinical utilisation of fMRI for the
      visualisation of brain activations related to language, motor and sensory
      functions and memory. For example, we developed the use of fMRI to
      determine non-invasively which side of the brain processes language, as
      this area has to be preserved in surgery [2]. Previous procedures
      required an invasive carotid amytal test, in which a short-acting
      barbiturate was injected into the artery, with associated risk of
      complications.
    The most common surgical treatment for epilepsy is called anterior
      temporal lobe resection. A common adverse effect of this surgery is
      blindness in part of the visual field, which can prevent driving, even if
      the epilepsy is cured. Since 2003, we have implemented MR tractography,
      with the first demonstration of seeding a tract from activation maxima
      with functional MRI. We have used tractography to visualise the optic
      radiation and corticospinal tracts, and have combined these visualisations
      with 3-dimensional multimodal data to provide a comprehensive depiction of
      individual structural and functional neuroanatomy. Since 2004, we have
      used MR tractography to delineate white matter pathways on magnetic
      resonance images acquired from patients prior to the surgery, publishing
      the first paper on this topic [3]. We subsequently showed the
      variability of the anatomy of this part of the brain, and how the extent
      of surgical damage was related to the severity of loss of vision [4].
      We have used this information to help plan the surgery and reduce the risk
      of damage to this critical white-matter structure during the operation [5].
      We have also used those methods to determine the risks of neurosurgery to
      language function [6, 7].
    In 2012, we introduced the use of tractography during neurosurgical
      operations using an interventional MRI suite to assist in the planning and
      ongoing conduct of the surgical procedures and further minimise the risk
      of damaging critical pathways. Most recently, we have pioneered the
      display of tractography of the visual pathway during surgery, with
      correction of the movement of the brain that occurs during surgery,
      showing that this approach reduced the occurrence of serious loss of
      vision after surgery to zero. The 3D multimodal datasets we have developed
      to facilitate this approach now combine structural and functional MRI,
      tractography and representation of arteries and veins, and also maps of
      abnormalities of cerebral blood flow, glucose utilisation and visual
      representations of electrical (electrical source imaging, ESI) and
      magnetic (magnetic source imaging, MSI) abnormalities that permit us to
      infer the location of epileptic foci in the brain. The end result is a
      3-dimensional map of the brain that visualises critical structures that
      must not be damaged, and highlights abnormal areas the removal of which is
      needed to cure epilepsy. This allows optimal decisions to be made
      regarding the surgical approach and trajectory to give the best chances of
      a good outcome and with minimum risk to the individual patient.
    