CaseStudyId: 44363
Title: 
    Improving vision of patients with angle-closure glaucoma
    

ImpactDetails

    The underpinning research has improved clinical management of patients
      with or at risk of developing angle-closure glaucoma. These benefits have
      arisen primarily through the impacts of the research on global
      understanding of and guidelines for glaucoma management and, subsequently,
      on clinical practice in this area.
    Glaucoma causes irreversible loss of vision. It ranks second only to
      cataract as a cause of blindness worldwide, and angle-closure glaucoma
      accounts for half of all glaucoma blindness. The number of people with
      glaucoma has been projected to increase by 33% between 2010 and 2020, from
      16 million globally in 2010 to an estimated 21 million by 2020 [a].
      Prevalence of glaucoma increases exponentially with age, making it a
      significant global public health problem. In England, NHS data show that
      7% of all outpatient activity occurs within hospital eye services, and
      glaucoma accounts for around 25% of all eye outpatient activity.
    The research outlined above has made a major contribution to widespread
      recognition of the scale and significance of angle-closure glaucoma as a
      global problem, particularly in Asia but also in Europe, where an
      estimated 1.6 million are currently affected [b]. The
      classification system designed initially for epidemiological studies ([1]
      above) has now become the international standard classification system for
      natural history staging of angle-closure glaucoma. In 2006 it was adopted
      by the World Glaucoma Association as its international classification
      system, which has resulted in a global impact on understanding and
      influence on guidelines through the period 2008- 13 [c].
    Key clinical guidelines in Asia Pacific, Europe and the US have been
      influenced by the research described above. Foster was a member of the
      Working Party that produced the first ever Asia Pacific Glaucoma
      Guidelines. These draw on his work particularly in their opening section
      on epidemiology. These guidelines were first published in 2004, and have
      remained in use throughout the period 2008-13 [d]. Foster also
      advised on production of the 3rd edition of the European Glaucoma
      Society's Terminology and guidelines for glaucoma, which were published in
      2008 [e]. These guidelines likewise frequently draw on and
      directly cite the research outlined above. They are widely distributed to
      and used by clinicians across Europe. The American Academy of
      Ophthalmology (AAO) Preferred Practice Patterns (PPP), also make use of
      the underpinning research described above. The PPP for Primary Angle
      Closure (published in 2010) makes similarly extensive use of Foster's
      research, citing [1], [2], [3], and [5] [f]. Again, these
      references appear particularly frequently in the section dealing with
      epidemiology. PPP documents are published by the AAO as "a service to its
      members and the public", allowing them to "identify characteristics and
      components of quality eye care".
    The development of these guidelines drawing on the research has had a
      significant effect on clinical practice and, in turn, has had positive
      impacts on patient experience, wellbeing and clinical outcomes. More
      specifically, the new guidelines have catalysed a more proactive approach
      to the management of angle-closure glaucoma in the UK, especially as a
      result of increased awareness of its early stages. This direct impact of
      the research-based change in guidelines on the management of angle-closure
      glaucoma is evident from Hospital Episodes Statistics (HES) data revealing
      trends in laser surgery for angle-closure glaucoma between 1998 to 2010.
      These data show a stable rate of laser iridotomies of 2-3,000 per annum
      between 1998 and 2003 in the UK. Between 2003 and 2010, however, laser
      iridotomy rates in the UK have risen almost 3-fold, from 3,093 to 8,669
      per year [g]. This increase in treatment rates, which reflects
      findings and recommendations made in the underpinning research
      (particularly [6]) corresponds with a 45% fall in the rate of acute
      attacks of angle-closure glaucoma in the UK. Emergency angle-closure
      glaucoma treatments between 1998 and 2002 averaged 1,242/annum. Between
      2007 and 2010, this had fallen to 703/annum.
    
ImpactSummary

    Glaucoma is one of the major causes of blindness world-wide and is
      characterised by visual loss arising from death of retinal ganglion cells.
      One important form, angle-closure glaucoma, is particularly prevalent in
      Asia. Based on experience of large-scale epidemiological surveys, UCL
      researchers devised a classification for angle-closure glaucoma that has
      become the international standard for this condition. The research been
      used as the basis for the development of the current framework for the
      management of angle-closure glaucoma, informing the development of both
      new and revised guidelines used around the world.
    
UnderpinningResearch

    Glaucoma is a progressive blinding condition and one of the most
      important causes of blindness in the world. Characterised by loss of
      retinal ganglion cells (which send visual information to the brain), it
      causes patients to progressively lose areas of visual field. Of the
      different forms of glaucoma, the most prevalent in Western societies is
      known as open-angle glaucoma and this has been extensively studied.
      However, prior to 1995 there were few published data to guide clinical
      decision-making on angle-closure glaucoma, which makes up only 10% of
      glaucoma cases in Western societies, and occurs when there is obstruction
      to drainage of fluid from the front chamber of the eye. Since then,
      research conducted by Paul Foster at the UCL Institute of Ophthalmology
      has improved understanding of the epidemiology of glaucoma, has
      established popular screening techniques for early detection and
      management of the condition, and has measured the safety and efficacy of
      preventative treatment for angle-closure glaucoma by laser surgery. This
      has included extensive population-based research, much of which has been
      used to identify novel environmental and lifestyle associations with
      glaucoma.
    The first step in finding a solution to a clinical problem is often to
      define it. A series of epidemiological studies led to the first
      high-quality reports of glaucoma prevalence and risk factors in Mongolia
      and Singapore [1-3]. Foster also pioneered similar work in China,
      where he was the first to identify large numbers of angle-close glaucoma
      sufferers. These studies not only contributed to awareness of the
      magnitude of the problem of angle-closure glaucoma in Asian populations,
      but also led to a deeper understanding of its natural history.
      Ascertaining the mechanism of angle closure (pupillary block, plateau,
      lens-related, retro-lenticular) is essential for management, and these
      findings had important implications for clinicians' ability to assess
      prognosis and describe the need for treatment at different stages of
      natural history of the disease.
    This was followed by a pivotal, highly cited (&gt;700) publication in
      2002 [4]. Although the research was initially framed to facilitate
      clinical studies, it also provided the basis for how clinicians consider
      and manage the condition. The classification system set out in this
      publication defined three stages of the condition:
    (a) primary angle-closure suspect (PACS); patients where there are
      anatomical risk factors at the front of the eye that could cause
      obstruction, but no evidence of obstruction
    (b) primary angle closure (PAC); patients with anatomical risk factors
      and evidence of obstruction but no evidence of glaucoma
    (c) primary angle closure glaucoma (PACG); patients with PAC and
      evidence of glaucoma
    The acceptance and significance of this classification system in the
      research domain is indicated by its adoption in about 50% of
      epidemiological studies since its definition [5]. It has also
      provided the basis for subsequent major clinical trials generating
      additional `downstream' impact. For example, UCL researchers determined
      that laser peripheral iridotomy (the standard first-line intervention for
      acute and chronic angle closure) reversed the anatomical abnormality that
      leads to PACG in around 75% of Chinese patients. It also identified four
      independent anatomical factors on anterior segment imaging which predicted
      the probability of a successful outcome of laser iridotomy [6].
    