CaseStudyId: 44366
Title: 
    Improving treatments for non-Hodgkin lymphomas
    

ImpactDetails

    Our research has changed the way patients with NHL are managed in the UK
      and worldwide. This
      work has resulted in improved patient survival, quality of life and
      appropriate resource utilisation.
    In relapsed and resistant DLBCL our research has helped to establish the
      benefit of ASCT in this
      situation. The subsequent CORAL trial indicated that there was no benefit
      to post-ASCT rituximab
      maintenance therapy and this saves approximately &#163;18,000 per patient. In
      the front line treatment
      of DLBCL, the finding that R-CHOP given every three weeks is as effective
      as the more intensive
      two-weekly R-CHOP, which requires growth factor support, has allowed
      discontinuation of this
      more expensive strategy.
    In advanced follicular lymphomas, our research provided the trial data
      that has underpinned the
      policy of withholding chemotherapy until symptoms intervene. The advantage
      of this is to avoid
      toxicity of treatment. The subsequent evidence we provided of the effect
      of rituximab in these
      patients improved the treatment for these patients still further. These
      policies have been
      incorporated into UK guidelines, which state that: "Observation remains
        an appropriate approach
        in patients with asymptomatic advanced stage follicular lymphoma in an
        attempt to delay the need
        for chemotherapy. This is particularly the case for patients over 70
        years of age" [a]. In the US,
      guidelines from the National Comprehensive Cancer Network state that: "Observation
        may be
        appropriate in Stage I and II disease where potential toxicity of
        involved field radiotherapy
        outweighs potential clinical benefit" and in patients with more
      advanced disease who are
      asymptomatic, "Watchful waiting is the only approach advised" [b].
      The European Society for
      Medical Oncology also made similar recommendations in their 2010
      guidelines [c]. Based on the
      incidence of indolent forms of NHL, since 2008 approximately 900 patients
      per year in the UK
      have been able to delay chemotherapy with its attendant toxicities [d].
      This strategy also
      conserves resources without detriment to the patients. The average age of
      presentation of
      follicular lymphoma approaches 70 years of age, and up to 40% of surviving
      asymptomatic
      patients above this median age at presentation will not have need of any
      chemotherapy over the
      following 10 years [e], a period during which competing causes of
      death will have intervened.
    Our studies have established the role of allogeneic RITs in patients with
      relapsed and resistant
      lymphomas. The BCSH guidelines state that "Reduced Intensity
        Conditioning allogeneic
        transplants should be considered for younger follicular lymphoma
        patients who have relapsed" [a],
      and a similar statement is contained in the European guidelines [c].
      The US NCCN guidelines [b]
      advocate a similar approach and suggest that allogeneic stem cell
      transplants should be
      considered in selected cases such as those patients who have failed an
      autograft, did not mobilise
      sufficient stem cells for such a procedure or who had persisting bone
      marrow disease.
    In summary, the establishment of allogeneic transplantation strategies in
      relapsed and resistant
      non-Hodgkin's lymphomas, both indolent and DLBCL, is undoubtedly saving
      lives. Based on
      European Group for Blood and Marrow Transplantation (EBMT) activity data
      for the period
      spanning 2006 to 2011 [f, g], we estimate that 26,000 patients
      with NHL underwent autologous
      and 6,000 underwent allogeneic transplants. From prior EBMT publications
      on transplantation for
      lymphoma that 60% of these transplants were performed for indolent NHL or
      DLBCL. We can
      therefore estimate that approximately 6,500 patients with have been cured,
      and in the case of
      indolent lymphoma 2,000 patients have attained durable remissions,
      following autologous and
      allogeneic transplantation.
    
ImpactSummary

    Clinicians and scientists at UCL have been central to the design and
      management of single centre
      and multi-centre lymphoma trials within the UK and internationally. The
      trials have enabled a
      balanced approach to the non-Hodgkin lymphomas (NHL), supporting more
      conservative
      strategies in certain well-defined situations but also providing evidence
      for the value of very
      intensive therapy in appropriate patients. These trials have contributed
      to patient survival, quality of
      life and appropriate resource utilisation.
    
UnderpinningResearch

    The non-Hodgkin lymphomas (NHL) are malignancies of the cells of the
      lymphoid system. They
      are the sixth most common cause of cancer and the reported incidence has
      risen dramatically over
      the last 40 years. There are many different types of NHL with variable
      speeds of progression,
      response to treatment and ultimate cure rates. Broadly there are those
      that are aggressive but
      respond well to chemotherapy, including in many cases resulting in cure.
      Conversely there are
      variants that progress slowly, and although the chances of cure are small,
      patients can survive
      many years with their disease.
    In aggressive NHL (Diffuse Large B-Cell Lymphomas; DLBCL), one of the
      commonest types of
      NHL, our major contribution has been to establish the role of autologous
      stem cell transplant
      (ASCT) in patients who relapse after primary chemotherapy. The regime we
      invented consists of
      two parts: initially high dose chemotherapy to ablate the bone marrow
      using the `BEAM' regimen (a
      combination of carmustine, etoposide, cytarabine and melphalan) followed
      by autologous stem cell
      transplantation (ASCT; using stem cells harvested previously from the
      patient's blood) [1]. This
      regime has been the mainstay of treatment for relapsed NHL since 1995. Our
      subsequent studies
      have confirmed that relapsed patients are the most appropriate candidates
      for ASCT as there is no
      advantage to using ASCT earlier in the treatment path [2].
      Chemotherapy alone remains the
      optimal first-line treatment and we have shown that intensifying
      chemotherapy (the combination of
      cyclophosphamide, doxorubicin, vincristine and prednisolone with
      rituximab; R-CHOP) on a two-weekly
      as opposed to a less intensive three-weekly regimen [3] does not
      improve outcome. In a
      recent international trial (the CORAL trial) we demonstrated that after an
      autograft for relapsed and
      resistant DLBCL there is no added benefit of rituximab administered as
      maintenance therapy [4].
    In indolent NHL, we showed that for asymptomatic patients, a policy of
      watchful waiting allows
      chemotherapy to be postponed by an average of two and a half years with no
      reduction in survival
      rates [5]. This became standard care for the 30-40% of all
      follicular lymphoma patients who are
      asymptomatic at the time of diagnosis. Subsequently in 2010 we reported on
      results of a trial to
      compare rituximab therapy with watchful waiting. We found that treatment
      with rituximab has
      advantages over watchful waiting: at three years, 54% of patients in the
      watch-and-wait arm had
      required chemotherapy compared to only 18% in the rituximab arm and there
      was improved quality
      of life [6]. As a result, since this work was presented in
      abstract form in 2010, monotherapy with
      rituximab alone is now widely used in this situation.
    Lastly, for patients who relapse after ASCT, we refined optimal usage of
      allogenic stem cell
      transplantation in NHL. Allogeneic transplantation (where the stem cells
      are from a donor rather
      than the patient's own) had been demonstrated to be associated with a
      graft-versus-lymphoma
      activity in a number of retrospective registry reviews performed by the
      European Group for Blood
      and Marrow Transplantation, an effect of the foreign stem cells that were
      infused to repopulate the
      bone marrow. However this procedure was too toxic in NHL, with high
      mortality rates directly
      related to procedural toxicity. In addition, the donor stem cells mounted
      an immune response
      against not only the lymphoma, but other healthy tissues, so-called
      graft-versus-host disease
      (GvHD). We introduced reduced intensity transplants (RITs) incorporating
      depletion of the harmful
      GvHD-inducing immune cells with alemtuzumab but preserving those that had
      anti-lymphoma
      effects. This greatly reduced the toxicity and mortality associated
      with allogeneic transplantation
      [7]. In 2010, in the setting of relapsed follicular lymphoma, we
      showed that excellent results (not
      bettered anywhere world-wide) are achieved with RIT, augmented by donor
      lymphocyte
      transfusions, resulting in progression-free survival at four years of 76%
      (90% if there is a matched
      sibling donor) [8].
    