CaseStudyId: 44383
Title: 
    Clinical and genetic characterisation of inherited forms of heart muscle
      disease and the impact on service provision and patient care
    

ImpactDetails

    Genes identified by our research are now regularly tested for in the UK
      and around the world. The UCL Hospital (UCLH) inherited disease service is
      the largest of its kind in the UK, seeing more than 20% of the national
      caseload. Between 2008 and 2013, a total of 745 patients with
      cardiomyopathy underwent diagnostic genetic testing at our genetic clinic
      [a]. The benefits to patients are: more accurate description of
      prognosis; diagnosis in family members; and, if needed, prevention of
      sudden death through the implantation of defibrillator devices
      (implantable cardioverter defibrillators, ICD). Genetic testing has also
      been shown to be highly cost-effective in patients with cardiomyopathy [b].
    We have worked with expert groups to produce international guidelines for
      genetic testing. In 2008, Elliott co-chaired the statement development
      group (of which McKenna was also a member), which produced an HRUK
      position statement on clinical indications for genetic testing in familial
      sudden cardiac death syndromes [c]. In 2010, we contributed to
      guidelines issued by the European Society of Cardiology on genetic
      counselling and testing in cardiomyopathies [d]. These referenced
      our work in relation to predictive diagnosis in asymptomatic relatives,
      and recommended screening for genes we had identified. In 2011, McKenna
      co-authored a consensus statement from the Heart Rhythm Society (HRS) and
      European Heart Rhythm Association (EHRA) on genetic testing for the
      channelopathies and cardiomyopathies [e]. Work from the group was
      heavily referenced in this document.
    AVRC: Genetic testing of families with ARVC is particularly
      important. Early disease manifestations may be missed using conventional
      imaging protocols although individuals remain at risk of sudden cardiac
      death. Our detailed work examining the relationship between genetic
      mutations and clinical presentation has led to a new European
      classification for cardiomyopathies and a clinically-based approach to
      diagnosis that emphasises disease specific presentations and outcomes,
      which was outlined in position statements from the European Society of
      Cardiology in 2008 and 2013 (to which Elliott contributed) [f].
      Our work studying the expression of genetic mutations in ARVC directly
      informed the development of new diagnostic criteria for the disease that
      have resulted in improved detection of disease [g].
    HCM: The risk stratification algorithms we developed for HCM have
      been used to guide ICD implantation. Since 2008, 395 patients with HCM
      have undergone ICD implantation using the risk tools developed by our
      group [a]. The benefit to patients is prevention of sudden cardiac
      death, as the device senses a heart rhythm disturbance and can restore
      normal rhythm. In 2010, these algorithms were incorporated into a position
      statement issued by the specialist society, Heart Rhythm UK, on clinical
      indications for ICDs in adult patients with familial sudden cardiac death
      syndromes [h]. Our group is also leading a large European cohort
      study that aims to construct clinical tools for estimating individual
      patients' risk for disease-related complications [i]. The first
      risk model was published in October 2013, and will be included in new
      European treatment guidelines due for publication in 2014.
    Lamin AC gene mutations: Our work in patients with heart muscle
      disease caused by Lamin AC gene mutations showed that most people who
      inherit the gene develop disease with a predictable natural history
      beginning with atrial rhythm disturbance in early adulthood with
      subsequent progression to heart block, potentially fatal ventricular
      problems and finally to progressive heart failure. Early recognition of
      these characteristic stages of disease facilitates much earlier diagnosis
      for patients and families and has allowed us to develop predictive models
      that identify patients who might benefit from early treatment with
      anticoagulants and prophylactic ICD implantation. Based on our research,
      new European Society of Cardiology guidelines for cardiac pacing include a
      recommendation for ICD implantation in patients with Lamin AC mutations.
      Since 2008, 22 families with definite Lamin AC mutations have been
      identified in the UCL screening clinic [a].
    Improvement of cardiac services: Throughout the course of our
      research, we have engaged with policy-makers and specialist organisations
      to translate our findings into better policy, service design and
      commissioning of specialist services for these conditions. In 2005,
      McKenna co-chaired the consultation process of the UK National Service
      Framework (NSF) on Arrhythmia and Sudden Death, leading to the publication
      of a new chapter (Chapter 8) of this framework. Building on the work being
      done at the UCL clinic at the time, this document recommended that
      evaluation of families should take place in a dedicated clinic with staff
      who are trained in diagnosis, management and support and with genetic
      counselling and further testing available if appropriate. McKenna
      subsequently produced a Proposal for the Establishment of Inherited
        Cardiovascular Conditions Centres which was endorsed by the
      Department of Health (DH) and, according to the PHG Foundation in 2009,
      was "Described as a `blueprint' for services and quoted many times in
        DH meetings" [j]. These recommendations have remained key
      elements of the NHS England commissioning framework for specialist
      commissioning of inherited cardiovascular disease services that has set
      out the framework for screening clinics [k].
    Work with patient groups: We have also worked closely with patient
      groups on multiple public and patient engagement initiatives. McKenna and
      Elliott have both been key speakers at patient days organised by the
      Cardiomyopathy Association, and McKenna also wrote a review of
      cardiomyopathy for this charity [l]. McKenna is a patron of the
      charity Cardiac Risk in the Young, and has assisted this organisation with
      screening for hereditary cardiac diseases [m]. McKenna and Elliott
      are both on the board of advisors for the Hypertrophic Cardiomyopathy
      Association. McKenna's research is directly cited on the website of this
      organisation, and he was worked with them, for example, to deliver
      professional education days highlighting the risks of sudden death due to
      HCM in young athletes [n].
    
ImpactSummary

    Over the past decade our research findings have impacted on the diagnosis
      and treatment of patients with inherited cardiomyopathies. Our work on
      risk stratification in patients with hypertrophic cardiomyopathy forms the
      basis for international guidelines on the use of implantable cardioverter
      defibrillators. Our research in patients with arrhythmogenic right
      ventricular cardiomyopathy has led to the development of a new
      international standard for the diagnosis of disease in patients and
      relatives. We have contributed to national and European guidelines on
      genetic testing in these conditions. We have also been influential in
      changing national policies, service design, and provision of care for
      inherited heart muscle disease.
    
UnderpinningResearch

    Cardiomyopathies are primary diseases of the heart muscle, which are
      usually inherited. They cause a variety of clinical syndromes, including
      sudden death in apparently healthy young people, heart rhythm disturbances
      in later life, many of which are fatal, and debilitating heart failure
      that reduces the quality of life and causes premature death for many
      patients.
    The research reported below represents basic molecular and clinical
      research undertaken by our group that has had a significant impact on the
      identification and treatment of patients with cardiomyopathies. It has
      also underpinned development of the largest inherited cardiovascular
      disease service in the UK at UCL Hospitals NHS Foundation Trust and Great
      Ormond Street Hospital. Our research encompasses gene discovery and
      prevalence, clinical manifestations of disease and prognosis. Our work has
      resulted in the identification of new disease-causing genes in each of the
      major subtypes of heart muscle disease, and in rarer conditions; examples
      are given below.
    Hypertrophic cardiomyopathy (HCM): About 1 in 500 of the UK
      population has hypertrophic cardiomyopathy (HCM), which is the commonest
      inherited cardiac disease. We have identified new mutations in patients
      with this condition [1], and have established a new method for the
      classification of genetic variants [2]. The data collected through
      our clinical evaluation programme have been used to develop the first
      validated sudden death risk prediction tool for patients with HCM. This
      provides accurate individualised estimates for the probability of sudden
      cardiac death (SCD) using readily collected clinical data [3]. We
      currently lead a large international consortium (HCM-RISK) that is
      developing individualised risk scores for other disease-related outcomes.
    Arrhythmogenic right ventricular cardiomyopathy (ARVC): ARVC
      commonly presents with heart rhythm disturbance and sudden cardiac death
      in young, previously well individuals. In 2005, systematic evaluation of
      families with ARVC using cardiac magnetic resonance imaging revealed
      previously unrecognised sub-clinical forms of disease [4]. We and
      other investigators identified new mutations in families with ARVC [5].
      Through systematic genetic testing and high fidelity clinical
      characterisation of patients and relatives harbouring disease-causing
      genetic mutations our studies revealed a high prevalence of multiple
      genetic mutations in people with ARVC that convey poor prognosis [6].
    Malignant ventricular arrhythmias (MVA) in Lamin A/C mutation
        carriers: Since 2011, work funded by a European Union seventh
      framework programme performed in collaboration with other European centres
      (INHERITANCE Consortium) has led to improved characterisation of patients
      with laminopathies, a group of diseases caused by mutations in the gene
      coding for a protein called Lamin AC that accounts for 5-8% of unexplained
      heart failure and also leads to sudden cardiac death [7].
    