CaseStudyId: 34618
Title: 
    Creating educational and commercial access to English language
        resources: using corpora for English language teaching and learning
    

ImpactDetails

    The use of UCL research to develop ICE-GB and later the IGE website has
      provided an innovative,
      free resource for English grammar teaching and learning which has
      profoundly enhanced
      educational opportunities and standards both within and beyond formal
      education systems, all
      around the world. Since its inception in 1998, the IGE website has
      attracted 3.7m users worldwide;
      between 2008 and 2013 it reached more than 1.2m users, including a core of
      over 215,000 repeat
      users.
    Provision of an educational resource for individual learners around
        the world
      There is a long tradition of using artificial,
      invented examples to illustrate grammatical
      phenomena to learners (e.g. The cat sat on the
        mat.). However, teachers and learners find the
      artificiality of these examples a barrier to their
      ability to get to grips with how grammar applies
      to real life. The IGE website and iGE app
      remedy this problem by making use of
      authentic examples sourced from the ICE-GB
      corpus to help learners acquire real English.
      The IGE website is freely available and has
      received over 1.3m hits since 2008 (over 3.7m
      hits since inception in 1998). These range from
      184,046 to 337,561 per year. Visits from
      unique users range from 149,642 to 298,089
      per year while 30-50,000 per year are repeat
      users, totalling over 215,000 repeat users since 2008. Although overall
      page hits declined from
      2008 to 2011, they were on the rise again through 2012 and the first half
      of 2013 [1]. The website
      brings key insights from UCL's long history of research into English
      grammar use to global users,
      as shown by the chart below, which demonstrates its appeal in the world's
      biggest markets for
      English learning.
    
    
    
    As a direct extension and further development of the IGE website, the iGE
      app sustains and
      expands IGE's impacts on beneficiaries in the non-academic educational
      sector and in the
      commercial sector by expanding its reach from the web to an easily
      accessible offline app. The
      iGE app is available in both free and paid versions. It has been
      downloaded by over 34,500 users
      who can now access innovative grammar lessons and exercises any time,
      anywhere. The paid
      version has been downloaded by around 3,500 users (Apple version &#163;4.99,
      Android version &#163;2.99)
      and the free version by over 31,000 users [1]. The app helps maintain
      IGE's global reach and user-base:
	  while the paid versions of the app are largely accessed in OECD
      countries such as the UK,
      US, and Australia, the free versions allow access to the vast number of
      people in non-OECD
      countries who are interested in learning English. Thus, the free version
      of the Apple app has a
      significantly higher proportion of downloaders from non-OECD countries,
      and while downloaders of
      the paid version are based in only 33 different non-OECD countries, those
      for the free version
      come from 74 [1].
    
    
    Note: The Google Store only gives the top ten countries from which apps have been downloaded.
     Thus &#8216;Others&#8217; may include both OECD and non-OECD countries.
     
    Note: The Google Store only gives the top ten countries from which
      apps have been downloaded.
      Thus `Others' may include both OECD and non-OECD countries.
    In July 2013, the iGE app had a rating of 5 stars (the highest possible
      rating) on both the Apple
      App and the Google Play stores. Reviewers described it as: `Authoritative
      (as you would expect
      from UCL), comprehensive, clear and informative...' [2], and noted
      appreciation for the wide range
      of materials it included: `Even in the free version', one reviewer wrote,
      `there is both scholarly yet
      easy to understand content about key aspects of English grammar, as well
      as very useful
      exercises...The full glossary included is easy to use and a fantastic
      reference for students of all
      levels. It is clear that this is the product of university-level work,
      made accessible to all kinds of
      users.' The app has also been positively reviewed elsewhere, including:
      Linguistics Research
        Digest; iPad English (`an essential purchase for iPad-owning
      English teachers... more advanced
      EFL/ESL students should also find it useful`) [4]; David Crystal's blog
      (`The model presented is a
      well-established and influential one, and there are lots of real examples
      of usage') [5]; Emphasis
        Business Writing Trainers; and the English Editing blog,
      which described it as `an essential
      acquisition for iPad-owning English teachers and more advanced learners'
      and listed iGE in its top
      10 apps for learners of English [6]. The most recent review on Google Play
      remarks: `This is a
      great way to refresh grammatical knowledge for adults....The best part is
      the large number of
      practice exercises that give great feedback and teach through the errors.
      ... Worth 10x the cost.
      Thank you for making such a quality learning tool' [3].
    Provision of a new resource supporting English language teaching
      Both the website and the app support individual study, and have provided
      an important and freely
      available resource for English language teachers the worldwide. Both are
      recommended on the
      BBC's `Learning English' site, while the IGE website has been recommended
      for use by English
      language teachers by, among others: the British Council, Macmillan
      Dictionaries Online, Guardian
      Education Online, Palgrave Study Skills, English Teaching in the UK,
      Intute, BUBL English
      Language Education, and UsingEnglish.com. Accordingly, it was noted in the
      Guardian in 2011
      that: `[T]his excellent site offers a detailed and clear course in English
      grammar for
      undergraduates' [7].
    The iGE app has also provided a useful learning resource to accompany
      professional educational
      courses both within and beyond the UK. For example, it now comprises a
      central part of the
      curriculum for undergraduate modules in English grammar at University of
      York [8] and at Montclair
      State University (USA). At MSU, the app is the only required resource for
      students enrolled in
      `Structure of American English', which in turn is a required course for
      all undergraduates in
      Linguistics, including those working towards certification in English as a
      Second Language [9].
    English Language Teaching is a huge growing industry worldwide, described
      in 2006 as second
      only to North Sea oil in its importance to the British economy [10]. The
      SEU has contributed to the
      global market in English teaching through its sale of licences of the IGE
      website. Since January
      2008, 13 such licenses for offline access to the IGE website were
      purchased by a number of
      companies and individuals [10].
    
ImpactSummary

    We used the research consolidated in the British Component of the
      International Corpus of English
      (ICE-GB) to build the Internet Grammar of English (IGE), a
      web-based introductory English
      grammar; and an app for smartphones and tablets, called the interactive
        Grammar of English
      (iGE). The app is based on the IGE website, but was fully updated with new
      materials and
      exercises. Both resources have had educational and commercial impact as
      tools for English
      language teaching, reaching over 1.2 million users in 2008-2013 through
      the website and over
      34,500 through the app.
    
UnderpinningResearch

    UCL's Survey of English Usage (SEU) research centre carries out research
      in English Corpus
      Linguistics, specifically English grammar: instituted in 1959, it was the
      first centre in Europe to
      undertake this type of research. Between 1990 and 1997, the SEU created
      the British Component
        of the International Corpus of English (ICE-GB) (www.ucl.ac.uk/english-usage/projects/ice-gb)
      [a].
      The grammatically analysed collection of language samples on ICE-GB
      contains a combined total
      of around 1 million words of written and spoken English, some 600,000 of
      which are fully parsed
      (grammatically analysed) examples of spoken English. As one of the largest
      collections currently
      available anywhere in the world, the corpus has been, and continues to be,
      an indispensable data-mining
	  resource for anyone interested in the grammar and linguistic
      features of both the spoken
      and written word. Complex and detailed searches of the corpus can be
      conducted using its
      innovative and world-leading exploration software ICECUP (International
      Corpus of English Corpus
      Utility Program): designed and developed at the SEU, ICECUP was originally
      released in 1998;
      version 2 was released in 2006. Using ICECUP, instances of grammatical and
      lexical constructions
      can be extracted from the corpus in intelligent ways, and to ascertain
      linguistic trends including
      contextual and frequency data for a vast array of linguistic features in
      actual use. In 2002, SEU
      researchers published a comprehensive reference to ICE-GB, including the
      use of ICECUP [b].
    The research was funded by a number of grants (ESRC, Leverhulme Trust,
      and British Sasakawa
      Foundation), whose Principal Investigators were Professor Sidney
      Greenbaum, Dr Mark Huckvale
      and Sean Wallis, all of UCL during the research period.
    In 1998 the Survey of English Usage used the grammatical annotation of
      spoken and written
      English in ICE-GB to develop the IGE website. The website's enduring
      popularity led, in 2011, to
      the provision of funding from UCL Business PLC for the development of the
      iGE smartphone/
      tablet app. This was launched for Apple devices in 2011, an Android
      version following in 2012. The
      IGE website was developed in a project funded by the Joint Information
      Systems Committee (JISC;
      grant reference JTAP 2/247), whose Principal Investigators were Professor
      Bas Aarts and Dr
      Douglas Arnold (University of Essex), with research conducted primarily at
      the SEU. Alongside
      Professor Aarts, UCL researchers working on this project included Dr
      Gerald Nelson (Deputy
      Director of the SEU, 2004-2007, currently Professor of English Linguistics
      at Chinese University of
      Hong Kong), and Justin Buckley (researcher in the SEU, 1995-1998).
    The development of the ICE-GB and, subsequently, of the IGE website was
      both supported by and
      itself fed into broader research undertaken within UCL's Department of
      English. This has included
      the production of numerous reference grammars based on Survey of English
      Usage corpora, both
      the ICE-GB corpus and others. Such grammars include Sidney Greenbaum's Oxford
        English
        Grammar (1996, based on ICE-GB), and Bas Aarts's Oxford Modern
        English Grammar (2011; also
      based on ICE-GB) [c].
    