CaseStudyId: 34619
Title: 
    The Bloomsbury Project: enriching public understanding of a vibrant
        centre of intellectual life
    

ImpactDetails

    Two days before the Bloomsbury Project website was launched on 15 April
      2011, an article of 1,100 words by Kieran Long appeared in the Evening
        Standard [1], which has a circulation of roughly 600,000 readers in
      London and beyond. This article eloquently described the nature of the
      website's impact: `It enriches,' Long observed, `our understanding of this
      small, vital area of London, helps us to understand how institutions, from
      small charities to international universities, can influence its
      neighbourhood in ways at first unimaginable. It also shows how
      individuals, brought together by contrasting motivations, create the city
      between them.'
    Long's article for a mass-circulating London paper indicates the extent
      to which the Bloomsbury Project has succeeded in translating the research
      of Ashton and her team into a resource of lasting value to the world
      beyond academia. The project has enhanced understanding of 19th-century
      Bloomsbury and made easily available to the public a wealth of information
      about numerous significant institutions and historic buildings in an area
      of London with a contribution to intellectual and social history which
      extends far beyond its borders.
    The chief beneficiaries of the Project include those with an interest in
      the history and influence of London, as well as organisations seeking to
      investigate and conserve the past in this area. As Long's article
      suggests, it has also made a significant contribution to the
      interpretation of the cultural and historical capital of this area, and in
      doing so, enriched the lives and understanding of the public in London and
      beyond.
    This was achieved through the release of the immensely popular Bloomsbury
      Project website, which has brought the research to a global audience and
      attracted over 3,000 visits per month. Ashton's monograph Victorian
        Bloomsbury was reviewed positively in mass circulating papers such
      as the Telegraph (`That Ashton has managed to tame "Bloomsbury",
      and present it in such a coherent, digestible fashion, is triumph
      indeed'), the Guardian (`absorbing, researched from the ground
      up'), and Independent (a `fascinating account of 19th-century
      reforming bodies and personalities that shaped the other, institutional
      Bloomsbury') &#8212; newspapers with a combined daily circulation exceeding
      900,000 readers [2].
    Reaching a global public through the Bloomsbury Project website
    In the month following its launch the website received 9,777 hits, and
      since then it has attracted an average of 3,000-5,000 hits a month [3]. In
      total, between April 2011 and 31 July 2013, the website has received
      117,135 hits. Feedback and enquiries from users suggest that the Project
      has been successful in reaching its target beneficiaries, namely
      individuals who live in and/or work on Bloomsbury. A five-minute film
      outlining the Project, available on YouTube, has been viewed 6,074 times
      to date.
    Although disaggregated Google Analytics visit data is only available for
      one month (May 2013) [3], it demonstrates the global reach of this
      resource. While most site visits came from the United Kingdom, a
      substantial proportion also originated in other English-speaking and
      European countries. Indeed, visitors from France and the United States
      spent the longest time on the site, at over 7 and 4 minutes on average.
    The significance of its value as a reusable learning resource is
      demonstrated by the fact that the Bloomsbury Project website was nominated
      for inclusion as a permanent resource `of long term research value' by the
      Wellcome Library, and was archived and made available through the British
      Library [4].
    As the number of hits recorded and the many emails to the Project
      testify, the website has proved a valuable resource for the general
      public. One television producer `found a treasure trove of information in
      your Bloomsbury Project' for a forthcoming BBC documentary.
    Local historians and amateur local historical associations, made
      extensive use of the findings of the Bloomsbury Project, whose website has
      developed into an important resource for the memorialisation of the area's
      history. The Bloomsbury Association has declared this website `very useful
      as it provides the definitive story of the area's development'. The Camden
      Local History Society, a charitable organisation of about 300 local
      historians, which publishes street histories of the borough, consults the
      Project website for information in order to revise and update its
      publication, Streets of Bloomsbury and Fitzrovia. The editors,
      David Hayes and Peter Woodford, called the Bloomsbury Project website `an
      invaluable source both of facts and of inspiration for further lines of
      research' [5]. The Marchmont Association, a residents' association based
      around one of the area's historic streets, also drew upon the website to
      add to the fourth edition of the book The Story of Marchmont Street
      [6], and the organisation has `found the site very useful as a source of
      information for former residents of other streets... for whom we may
      consider installing commemorative plaques'. During the impact period, this
      included gathering information to put the case for a Blue Plaque for J. M.
      Barrie in Grenville Street [7].
    An important aspect of the Project's impact derived from its active
      solicitation of public engagement in the research process itself. For
      example, a blog run by Carole Reeves during the lifetime of the Project
      (2008-2011) reached out to descendants of people living in Bloomsbury.
      This blog attracted dozens of family stories reaching from Bloomsbury to
      Canada and South Africa. An indicative example is that of Bishop Andrew
      McLagen whose life and relationship with Bloomsbury (as well as South
      Africa and even, via his son, Hollywood) was traced through a series of
      emails from correspondents [8].
    Engaging the public through walks, talks and exhibitions
    A deeper engagement with research was achieved through a series of events
      open to the public which used diverse, innovative means to engage the
      public with the findings of the research. These proved to be immensely
      popular, and collaborators in the organisation of these events attest to
      the significance of their impact on public understanding.
    For example, on 12 March 2010, the Department hosted a celebration of
      Bloomsbury Past and Present. This was free and open to the public, and
      included a series of talks given by Ashton and members of her team, and by
      invited speakers such as David Lodge and Lynne Truss. The audience of over
      300 included attendees from a wide range of local institutions, namely
      librarians, museum curators and archivists from Senate House, the British
      Museum, the Foundling Museum, the Swedenborg Society, and Camden
      Libraries, together with representatives of the Royal Historical Society
      and the Royal Commission on Historical Documents, local residents, blue
      badge guides, and local architects and publishers. A similarly diverse
      audience attended an event to commemorate the launch of the website by
      local novelist Ian McEwan on 15 April 2011. Both events played a
      significant role in bringing the Bloomsbury Project to the attention of a
      diverse non-academic audience, as the attendance figures and subsequent
      emails show [9].
    Members of the Bloomsbury Project team have given numerous talks on
      research findings at a range of public venues, including historical
      societies, further education centres, churches and libraries. These
      include the Institute of Historical Research (5 November 2008), Camden
      History Society (20 November 2008), the Mary Ward Centre (12 May 2009),
      the Bright Club (15 September 2009), St. George's Bloomsbury (23 November
      2011), Paddington Library (25 April 2012), the Bishopsgate Institute (18
      October, 2012) and Waterstones Gower Street (4 October, 2012). They have
      also led guided walks around Bloomsbury (5 July 2008, 24 October 2010). In
      2008, Ashton and Colville published an online leaflet of historic
      buildings of Bloomsbury as part of the London Festival of Architecture.
      From January to June 2010, UCL Library hosted an exhibition entitled
      `Innovators and Educators: UCL and Bloomsbury in the 19th Century'.
    An important example of public engagement involved the participation of
      the Project team in the Bloomsbury Festival. This is a free annual
      festival which attracts 50,000 people to Bloomsbury to attend talks,
      concerts and other cultural events. The significance of the impact on
      public understanding here is demonstrated by the close, ongoing
      relationship formed between the Project and the organisers of the
      Bloomsbury Festival, which led to repeat appearances every year: on 23-24
      October, 2010, 22 October 2011, and 20 October 2012, during which project
      researchers led guided walks, delivered talks and introduced audiences to
      the Project's research.
    The organiser of the event summarised the enthusiasm of beneficiaries
      thus: `Professor Rosemary Ashton's walks and appearances on Festival
      panels have been a highlight of the Festival for a number of years. Her
      walks are always fully booked, and receive brilliant feedback. They have
      acquired such a reputation that we often have enquiries about them well
      before the Festival programme is announced.' The organiser stressed the
      opportunities created by the Project for public engagement, noting that
      `it is brilliant for members of the public to have access to the kind of
      expertise that Rosemary brings, which is often otherwise found only in an
      academic context' [10].
    
ImpactSummary

    The Bloomsbury Project, which gathers the results of archival research
      into the geographical, cultural, and social development of Bloomsbury,
      London, in the 19th century, has assisted and enriched the investigations
      of local historians and organisations into the area. The Bloomsbury
      Project website receives over 3,000 hits each month (and often closer to
      5,000), Professor Rosemary Ashton's monograph Victorian Bloomsbury
      (2012) has been widely reviewed, and a series of well-attended public
      events has brought together members of the community working on
      Bloomsbury-related projects.
    
UnderpinningResearch

    The Bloomsbury Project was funded by a Leverhulme Large Project Research
      Grant, and was undertaken from 1 October 2007 to 30 April 2011. It was led
      by Professor Rosemary Ashton (Quain Professor of English Language &amp;
      Literature at UCL until October 2012) and employed Dr Deborah Colville as
      a Leverhulme-funded researcher (1 October 2007 to 30 April 2011, including
      a nine month break for maternity leave). The Leverhulme also funded two
      PhD students to work on the project: Matt Ingleby (UCL English Language
      &amp; Literature) and Tom Quick (Wellcome Trust Centre for the History of
      Medicine at UCL), who were both employed on the project from 1 October
      2007 to 1 October 2010. A further researcher, Dr Juliette Atkinson (then a
      British Academy Postdoctoral Fellow, and now Lecturer in UCL English
      Language &amp; Literature), was employed for two months in the summer of
      2008. The Bloomsbury blog was created and maintained by Dr Carole Reeves,
      Outreach Librarian of the Wellcome Trust Centre for the History of
      Medicine at UCL.
    The Project's main aim was to investigate 19th-century Bloomsbury's
      development from a swampy rubbish dump into a vibrant centre of
      intellectual life. Working in cooperation with Bloomsbury's institutions,
      societies and local residents, Ashton and her team researched the origins
      and significance of the numerous progressive and reforming institutions
      founded in the area during this period; the archives of more than 300 of
      these institutions were identified and investigated, from the large and
      well-known like the University of London (founded in 1828, and later
      renamed University College London), to smaller ventures such as the
      Alexandra Hospital for Children with Hip Disease (opened in a house in
      Queen Square in 1867). The archives examined cover a wide range of fields:
      19th-century innovations in art, law, education, science and medicine are
      all well represented in the material Ashton and her researchers uncovered.
    The Project also explored the activities of the various religious
      dissenters, millenarians, Jews, agnostics and Swedenborgians who founded
      educational establishments in 19th-century Bloomsbury. Of particular
      importance is the Project's research into the work of pioneers in the
      education of women, children and the working class, in institutions such
      as the Ladies' College (founded in Bedford Square in 1849), the Working
      Men's College (established in Red Lion Square in 1854) and the Passmore
      Edwards Settlement (which, founded in 1890, offered classes to local
      working-class people and their children). In addition, the Project
      undertook a detailed examination of the physical growth of the area; it
      explored the architectural history of both its large public buildings and
      its impressive domestic residences, and defined the social character of
      each street and square at different periods of the century.
    A further strand of the research concerned the representation of
      Bloomsbury in the work of various important 19th-century writers who lived
      there: these include Charles Dickens, William Makepeace Thackeray, Anthony
      Trollope, Mary Elizabeth Braddon, Mary Ward, George Gissing, Robert Louis
      Stevenson and J. M. Barrie, all of whose writings were influenced by and
      contributed to the spirit of Bloomsbury.
    The Bloomsbury Project website [a], one of the key outputs, is an online
      archive containing detailed information on Bloomsbury institutions (232
      entries) and streets, squares and buildings (427 entries). In addition, it
      includes a number of articles on particular aspects of 19th-century
      Bloomsbury, from novels about lawyers' wives to homes for abandoned women
      and spiritualist societies, from German exiles to the influx of Scots
      (especially medical men) into the area, from fringe religious societies to
      scientific discoveries, from the first women students at UCL to the first
      female landscape gardener. The site as a whole offers a web of information
      about 19th-century Bloomsbury: its people, institutions, streets and
      buildings.
    As a result of the Bloomsbury Project, an area long associated in the
      popular imagination only with Virginia Woolf and her circle has recovered
      its full intellectual and cultural history.
    