CaseStudyId: 34620
Title: 
    Colonial film: moving images and the legacy of the British Empire
    

ImpactDetails

    The Colonial Film project made visible and accessible crucial aspects of
      the history of British
      colonialism. It facilitated public engagement with the visual records of
      colonialism, and made them
      available in a process of international exchange intended to be
      diametrically opposed to the
      exploitative exchange of colonialism. In cataloguing films which were
      previously inaccessible it
      uncovered valuable forms of cultural and artistic capital in which facets
      of world heritage are
      preserved and commemorated. The conservation of this significant resource
      and its interpretation
      (re-)connected audiences within and beyond the UK with that heritage. In
      particular, by illuminating
      aspects of colonial history that are frequently occluded in contemporary
      discourse, the research
      allowed an interrogation both of Britain's colonial heritage and of a
      shared global history. The
      project brought significant benefit to its non-academic partners: it
      enhanced their cataloguing and
      recording processes; supported development of new exhibitions and learning
      resources; and
      provided them with a model for future collaborations with academia.
    The project's success in promoting global engagement with the visual
        records of colonialism
      is indicated by the large numbers of regular visitors to the website.
      Between January 2012 (the
      earliest date from which tracking data is available) and February 2013,
      128,575 people visited the
      site. More precisely, 168,081 visits, with a total of 478,994 page views,
      were made to the site from
      across the world, with the top 9 countries being the UK, USA, Australia,
      Canada, Malta, Israel,
      India, France and Malaysia. Website traffic averaged about 32,000 page
      views per month [1]. The
      website's significance to these visitors is apparent from emails to the
      project: between its launch in
      September 2010 and July 2013, the project received over 300 emails,
      predominantly from users in
      the UK and former British colonies, including Ghana, Malaysia, India,
      Singapore and Nigeria.
    While most are queries or simple expressions of appreciation, others
      exemplify its profound
      capacity to re-connect people with their family and national histories.
      Thus an email from a man in
      India, for example, explained that the project had allowed his family to
      see, for the first time, a film
      in which his father appeared as a young man in 1943. He wrote: `It was, I
      can tell you, a jolt to
      suddenly see my father at an age when there were not even photographs of
      him. Strange too for
      my mother! In fact we asked someone to be with her when she got to see it,
      in case it was
      perturbing, but she took it in her stride.' [2] In January 2009, the BFI
      posted Springtime in an
        English Village (1944), a film from the project corpus showing a
      young African girl being crowned
      May Queen in an English village, on their YouTube channel, where it has
      since been viewed more
      than 45,000 times. One of those viewers was the subject's own daughter,
      now living in Maryland,
      USA; her identification of her mother in the film on YouTube led to the
      restoration of contact
      between the latter and people from the village in which she had spent time
      as a young girl: the
      extraordinary story was shared with the public via its coverage in the Observer
      [3]. Although they
      are unusual, these responses exemplify the website's capacity to support
      remarkable transnational
      and post-colonial exchange.
    The project's capacity to reconnect the British public with its own
        cultural heritage (through
      our partner institutions in the cultural and museums sectors) was evident
      at its launch in 2010,
      which prompted substantial public engagement both with the films
      themselves and with issues
      relating to the truths they reveal about the British Empire. To celebrate
      the launch, a major public
      film series took place at the National Film Theatre (NFT) in London.
      Grieveson and the project
      team assisted with the organisation of a commercial film season titled
      `Film and the End of Empire'.
      This season, which set nonfiction films from the combined catalogue
      alongside better-known
      fictional feature films about Empire such as Zulu and Windom's
        Way, played in November 2011 to
      a paying audience of 1,033 [5]. It was accompanied by a two-month long,
      free exhibition of film
      posters, programmes, and archival documents, staged in the NFT's public
      gallery and accessible
      to all who attended screenings between October 2011 and December 2011.
      Both `Film and the
      End of Empire' and the accompanying exhibition were covered in the press,
      including in Sight &amp;
        Sound, the UK's top film magazine (19k subscribers) [6]. A smaller -
      but still substantial -
      audience of some 280 people also attended a film programme developed by
      UCL researchers and
      the curatorial team (shown at the Imperial War Museum during the first two
      weeks of July 2010
      [4]), and a Tate Modern event entitled `Out of the Archive: Artists,
      Images, History', which was
      shown in November 2011 and included screenings and panel discussions
      amongst scholars and
      artists about the use and place of film in historical research. Grieveson
      also curated a public film
      screening at the prestigious &#201;cole Normale Sup&#233;rieure, Lyon, in November
      2011, and answered
      questions after the screening from the audience.
    In addition to providing public access to a catalogue of previously
      little-seen evidence of Britain's
      colonial past, the project has also provided an invaluable new
        resource for use by heritage,
        cultural, and museums-sector professionals. Its collation of over
      6,000 films has preserved,
      catalogued and contextualised more than one hundred years of filmmaking
      practice, enabling
      archivists and film curators at participating collections and other
      external organisations (such as
      the Palestinian Film Foundation) to access and present this important -
      yet long overlooked &#8212; part
      of British and world history. The website received widespread acclaim
      amongst such professionals:
      it was a Finalist in the Focal Learning on Screen Awards in 2011; was
      praised by the British
      Library's Lead Curator of Moving Images, Luke McKernan, as a valuable
      resource for silent film [8];
      and ranked 1st in the Film Studies for Free annual list of Online Film and
      Moving Image Resources
      [9]. The archive has also inspired artistic production: it was
      used as a resource by the video
      artist Filipa C&#233;sar, whose collage short Black Balance reflects on the
      language of these films and
      was shown at the Tate Modern (November 2011) and in London, Hyderabad and
      Pittsburgh during
      Colonial Film symposia.
    The participating archives, at the BFI, Imperial War Museum and, until
      its demise the
      Commonwealth Museum, also benefited from the research. The project
      preserved fragile celluloid
      film through digitisation, saving significant but under-valued and
      under-studied films from
      deterioration or indeed loss. The BFI in particular noted that its records
      and cataloguing had been
      improved, as researchers brought records to a high standard, and even
      corrected errors directly
      into the BFI's own database [10]. Archivists identified three additional
      ways in which the project
      impacted positively upon their collections and work:
    A) Bringing new traffic to their websites and new interest in their
        collections from both
      researchers and the public. According to a senior archivist at the
      Imperial War Museum: `From the
      moment of its launch the new site attracted a more numerous and diverse
      range of researchers
      than the IWM's own film catalogue was then capable of attracting,' and
      called it the most important
      means of popularising the museum's collections internationally since the
      Thames Television World
        at War documentary series in 1974. [7]
    B) Providing a model for future collaboration between the archives
        and academic
        institutions. The IWM, for example, modelled its inclusion of a
      database of film materials used in a
      project exploring the inter-war experiences of empire on the Colonial Film
      archive [7].
    C) The use of academic contextualisation provided by the research team to
      bring new meaning
        to film texts languishing, untouched, in archives. The IWM reported
      that contextual and analysis
      pieces produced during the project were vital resources in themselves, and
      models of how it could
      `enhance popular understanding of other parts of its collections' in
      future projects [7]. Its
      Department of Research produced similar contextual essays, launched in
      February 2013, to
      accompany a research project on digitised films of World War I [11]. The
      catalogue and contextual
      information produced during the project likewise enabled the BFI to
        make far fuller use of their
        holdings. As with Springtime in an English Village, the BFI
      included several films uncovered and
      digitised by the research team on their YouTube channel, facilitating
      global public engagement with
      this unique material and the archive as a whole. From July 2010 to July
      2013, videos in the `India,
      Pakistan, Tibet' playlist were viewed over 499,000 times [12], and films
      uncovered through the
      project have been included in the BFI's Mediatheque-curated collections on
      India and Colonial
      Africa (the collection `Cape to Cairo: Moving Images of Colonial Africa`
      [10]), freely available to
      viewers at six locations around the UK.
    Films uncovered during the research have also been used by other cultural
      organisations,
      including the Egyptian film collective Mosireen, and the Palestinian Film
      Foundation, whose annual
      film festival at the Barbican in April 2012 drew on project resources
      (several films from the archive
      were shown) and expertise (a former postdoctoral researcher introduced the
      films) in a special
      programme on British Colonial Films in Palestine. The interest this raised
      is apparent in the sudden
      spike in hits to the Colonial Film website around the time of the annual
      festival. [1]. Furthermore,
      the project's work led to new international partnerships, including on a
      collaborative project with the
      Universities of Hyderabad and Pittsburgh exploring cinema and economy, led
      by Grieveson and
      funded by the British Council [see section 3, above].
    
ImpactSummary

    The Colonial Film project produced a major new website housing an online
      catalogue of all films
      showing life in British colonies held by three major film archives (the
      British Film Institute National
      Archive, the Imperial War Museum, and the British Empire and Commonwealth
      Museum) from
      1895 to the separate moments of independence. The project conserved and
      made newly
      accessible &#8212; both practically and intellectually &#8212; a significant global
      cultural heritage in the service
      of memorialising the frequently occluded history of the British Empire. It
      is now a major national
      and international resource, and has been utilised by its partner archives
      and others to improve their
      own cataloguing and hold new exhibitions.
    
UnderpinningResearch

    The AHRC-funded Colonial Film project (2007-2010) was run in
      collaboration between UCL,
      Birkbeck, and three film archives: the British Film Institute (BFI),
      Imperial War Museum (IWM), and
      the British Empire and Commonwealth Museum (BECM). Of the two Principal
      Investigators, Lee
      Grieveson was Reader at UCL throughout that period; Colin MacCabe was then
      professor at
      Birkbeck and the University of Pittsburgh. The project team included
      senior archivists at the BFI
      (Patrick Russell and Nigel Algar) and the IWM (Kay Gladstone) and four
      postdoctoral researchers
      at Birkbeck (Drs Tom Rice, Annamaria Motrescu (until 2008), Francis
      Gooding, and Richard
      Osborne).
    The project was rooted in Grieveson's own long-standing research on the
      ways in which, in the
      early twentieth century, states and corporations began to use film for
      propagandistic purposes.
      This guided subsequent research on how the colonial British state
      developed film institutions and
      new film forms to sustain its colonial project. In particular, Grieveson's
      work considered the nature,
      form, purpose, circulation, exhibition and reception of films produced by
      both the British state and
      other interested institutions, and sought to elucidate the role of film as
      a form of state and
      corporate discourse [a, b]. MacCabe's engagement in post-colonial theory
      supplemented this
      historical work. In assembling a team of academics and archivists,
      Grieveson and MacCabe
      sought to marry digitisation and archiving with contextual analysis as a
      means of bridging the gap
      between the archive and the academy in a project addressing a global
      public. This was particularly
      important in the context of the material on Britain's colonial past: it is
      now widely argued that the
      British Empire constitutes the single most significant example of
      repression within our national
      memory, and that our failure to think through the process by which Britain
      came to dominate one
      quarter of the globe for the better part of two centuries significantly
      contributes to current traumas
      around race and religion. By making the visual records of Empire
      available, and by carefully
      contextualising this material, the project sought to contribute to a
      global reckoning with the history
      and legacy of Empire.
    In order to do this, the project team sifted through thousands of records
      to extract a comprehensive
      list of every film containing footage, however brief, of a British colony
      before independence, and to
      assemble a new joint and integrated catalogue. They recovered a dazzling
      array of moving
      pictures &#8212; some 6,000 film records in all &#8212; dating from the 1890s to the
      handover of Hong Kong in
      1997. These included films of all places, and of all genres:
      documentaries, educational and
      instructional films, industrial films, propaganda, fiction, missionary and
      amateur films, few of which
      had previously been examined in any great detail. The newly integrated
      catalogue, which brought
      the entire corpus together for the first time, was housed within a major
      new website designed for
      the project [c]. Over 150 of the most significant films were digitised (in
      total more than 30 hours of
      footage) and a number of film programmes curated on the website. The
      website also includes over
      350 written entries produced by project members in response to individual
      films, as well as focused
      essays representing original research on major themes, events and
      institutions, including
      Grieveson's account of the Empire Marketing Board [d]. Further project
      outputs included two books
      co-edited by Grieveson and MacCabe [e], [f]; four international
      conferences (in the UK, India, and
      the USA); and two major public-facing film seasons at the BFI and the IWM.
    