CaseStudyId: 34804
Title: 
    Internationalising Dutch Studies
    

ImpactDetails

    Dutch is a mid-sized European language with about 22 million native
      speakers, but historical
      reasons have led to it having a global profile. The language is taught as
      far afield as Georgia,
      South Africa and Indonesia, and in most cases is largely dependent on
      support from the Dutch
      Language Union (DLU, or Nederlandse Taalunie). This is a unique
      intergovernmental treaty
      organisation which sets the language policies of its Dutch-speaking member
      countries, and
      provides financial and logistical support to teaching and research in
      Dutch Studies around the
      world. The research described above catalysed a global paradigm shift in
      the disciplinary
      conceptualisation of Dutch Studies, both among practitioners and in the
      DLU itself. Via this
      influence on the Dutch policy body, the research informed the deployment
      of a 5-year budget of
      some &#8364;60 million, thereby shaping the ways in which lecturers at
      approximately 220 faculties of
      Dutch in 43 countries [p. 2, see 1 in section 5] define, teach and
      research this discipline.
    Fenoulhet's research was the basis for her contributions as one of a team
      of four academics
      commissioned in 2008 by the Raad voor de Nederlandse Taal en Letteren
      (RNTL), to investigate
      the position of Dutch Studies both within and beyond the `home countries'
      of the Netherlands and
      Flanders in Belgium, and to give policy recommendations on the future of
      the discipline. The
      findings in the report were supported by a practitioner survey and an
      academic conference, and
      were based in part on Fenoulhet's earlier study of the development of
      Dutch Studies.
    The report resulting from that commission was generated specifically to
      provide policy advice to
      the Netherlands' Committee of Ministers, which oversees the work of the
      Dutch Language Union.
      Through this report the RNTL, which sets the DLU's policy direction,
      sought to revitalise a
      discipline which was increasingly seen by its practitioners as divided and
      stagnating, and
      especially to redress the disjuncture between intra muros (that
      is, `home countries') practitioners,
      regarded as occupying the centre of the disciplinary field, and those extra
        muros: practitioners
      operating in its periphery. Publications arising from the research
      described in section 2 had, in fact,
      already emphasised the importance of supporting two-way academic exchange
      between intra and
      extra muros practitioners, and suggested pathways to achieve this.
      Fenoulhet et al's
      recommendations for a move to an international or transnational
      (rather than a merely
      national[istic]) approach within Dutch Studies &#8212; as well as for the steps
      required to effect this &#8212;
      were incorporated wholeheartedly into the RNTL policy advice document Naar
        een internationale
        en interdisciplinaire neerlandistiek, published in March 2009 [2]
      and submitted to the Flemish
      Minister for Culture, Youth and Sport [3].
    This document prompted a paradigm shift in the field of Dutch Studies,
      notably the International
      Association for Dutch Studies, a key channel for the distribution of
      funding from the DLU and
      crucial player in catalysing change in Higher Education teaching and
      research. The
      recommendations to which Fenoulhet's work contributed enabled the DLU to
      instigate long-desired
      change in the field. The DLU has subsequently integrated these
      recommendations into policies
      and work plans.
    Policy reorientation at the DLU
    Policy recommendations in the RNTL document linked to Fenoulhet's
      research include: [2]
    - Stimulating international cooperation and developing joint curricula
      (3.1.1)
    - Reducing administrative obstructions to cooperation between
      universities (3.1.2)
    - Furthering international collaboration in teaching (3.1.3)
    - Supporting the research community outside Netherlands and Belgium
      (3.2.1)
    - Supporting journals of international Dutch studies (3.2.2)
    - Supporting joint PhD supervision (3.2.3)
    - Encouraging/ supporting opportunities for public and international
      research (3.2.4)
    The extent of the DLU's policy reorientation relating to its definition
      and promotion of Dutch Studies
      was demonstrated by its new efforts to support debate and dialogue, on an
      equal footing, between
      practitioners intra and extra muros. The RNTL policy
      advice document was launched by the Chair
      of the RNTL and the Director-General of the DLU in August 2009 at the
      University of Utrecht, at the
      17th conference of the International Association of Dutch Studies, a body
      part-funded by the DLU,
      which supports Dutch Studies teaching around the world. Following
      recommendation 3.2.4, and in
      recognition of its importance for the direction of the discipline as a
      whole, the Association devoted
      to it a special issue of its journal Internationale neerlandistiek
      (`International Dutch Studies'),
      formerly known as the Neerlandica extra muros (the journal for
      `outsiders'; renamed 2008) [4],
      funded by the DLU.
    Furthermore, Fenoulhet and the chair of the Association selected key
      papers from the 2009
      conference which represented the multidisciplinary way forward for Dutch
      Studies. These formed
      the first volume in a new series entitled Lage Landen Studies (Low
      Countries Studies), intended to
      provide publication opportunities for researchers practising the new
      transnational discipline.
      Volume 1, edited by Fenoulhet and Renkema, bears the programmatic title Internationale
neerlandistiek:
        een vak in beweging (International Dutch Studies: a discipline on
      the move [e]). By
      2013, six volumes had been published, demonstrating the lively response
      from the field. [4]
    Changes in policy on the support and practice of Dutch Studies
    The DLU's reorientation led to several specific changes in the ways in
      which Dutch Studies are
      funded and designed. In 2010, Fenoulhet was appointed as the only
      international academic
      advisor to the 12-member RNTL policy advice body, with a watching brief
      covering Dutch Studies
      as a worldwide academic subject [5]. Many of the recommendations she has
      made both in her
      research outputs and within that forum are reflected in subsequent
      decisions taken by the RNTL,
      including in its new five year plan (2012) advising on priorities for the
      allocation of its budget of &#8364;60
      million during 2013-17 [5]. Thus, for example, despite budgetary cuts
      prompted by the financial
      crisis the plan includes, as a key innovation, the provision of funding
      for digital access, a priority
      which reflects recommendation 3.2.1 that the needs of professionals
      outside the Dutch language
      area be supported through the provision of an excellent digital
      infrastructure. In 2012, for example,
      the DBNL was (the digital library of Dutch literature, an important
      resource for Dutch Studies
      worldwide) granted &#8364;[text removed for publication] in the DLU budget [6].
    The current five-year plan also give a high priority to support for
      literary translation through support
      for the expansion of a new bi-national Masters in Literary Translation at
      the Universities of Utrecht
      and Leuven, to be launched in September 2013, and to include the
      participation of Dutch Studies
      outside the language area [10]. UCL and the University of M&#252;nster were
      proposed as initial
      international partners. International meetings to discuss these
      developments were funded by the
      DLU via the Expertisecentrum Literair Vertalen (Centre of Expertise in
      Literary Translation) [5, p.
      58-9] from 2012.
    Following the revision to its approach to the promotion of Dutch Studies
      in 2010 [7], the DLU made
      available funding opportunities according to the needs of international
      Dutch Studies. Support to
      encourage contacts between researchers inside and outside the language
      area was developed, for
      instance, a fund to enable research visits to the Netherlands or Flanders
      of up to 6 months to fulfil
      the objectives of supporting young researchers, promoting Dutch Studies
      and contribute to its
      independence internationally, and promote accredited departments [7].
    Changes in how Dutch Studies is practised
    The DLU's change in orientation led to support for new forums where
      practitioners from around the
      word could engage in dialogue, on an equal footing regarding the future of
      their field. The open
      discussions facilitated by these forums are also a pathway for broader
      change within the discipline,
      prompting a move towards collaboration for which the report proposed
      channels and the DLU's
      changed priorities provide material support [11]. See, for example the
      digital platforms hosted by
      the International Association for Dutch Studies: in particular, the
      platform on Internationale
      Historische Neerlandistiek which hosted informal international debate
      among colleagues and
      ultimately gave rise to volume 6 in the Lage Landen Studies
      series, Beatrijs de wereld in, a study
      of translations of the medieval Dutch text in several European languages
      [11].
    In 2010, the University of Amsterdam launched the peer-reviewed
      English-language Journal of
        Dutch Literature, in line with recommendation 3.2.2. As its website
      states: `With its methodological
      and frequently interdisciplinary approach, the journal places Dutch
      literature in an international
      context, treating literary phenomena against the broader perspective of
      international literary
      research' [8], an approach that accords entirely with Fenoulhet's research
      and policy
      recommendations. Similarly, an international interdisciplinary conference
      (the 18de Colloquium
      Neerlandicum) held at the University of Antwerp in August 2012 with
      funding from the DLU [9]
      aimed to stimulate relevant changes in teaching. The conference included a
      programme of
      facilitated discussion on the nature of the Dutch Studies curriculum at
      universities around the
      world, and its future shape to ensure the internationalisation of the
      material taught as well as transnational co-operation between universities [9].
    There have been significant changes since 2009 in the extent of and
      significance attached to
      translation studies. Previously frequently considered peripheral to Dutch
      Studies, its role in
      intercultural exchange is now accepted, as is the role of departments
      outside the language area
      which are now seen as capable of producing good translators. In the
      current 5-year plan [5 p58-9],
      literary translation is identified as a site of dynamic exchange which
      strengthens the study of a
      language and culture. Since the publication of that report:
    - In 2012 Utrecht, Ghent and other universities launched talks on
      developing a new joint
      masters programme in literary translation. [10]
    - At UCL itself, in 2012 the DLU, via the Steunpunt Literair Vertalen,
      supported a workshop
      on Literary Translation, to bridge the gap between university study and
      literary translation
      as a career. Fourteen students from all over the UK were selected. The
      DLU, through the
      Expertisecentrum Literair Vertalen, contributed 40% of the total costs
      which came to
      &#8364;10,000.[10]
    
ImpactSummary

    Research on the discipline of Dutch Studies conducted at UCL contributed
      to recommendations
      from the Raad voor de Nederlandse Taal en Letteren (Council for Dutch
      Language and Literature),
      providing policy advice to the Committee of Ministers overseeing the Dutch
      Language Union, the
      intergovernmental organisation responsible for the internal and external
      language policies of the
      Netherlands and Flanders. This in turn led to a new policy of the Dutch
      Language Union, which
      influences a &#8364;12 million annual budget supporting Dutch language
      infrastructure across the world.
      It also led to substantial worldwide debate amongst university teachers
      and to changes in how
      these subjects are taught and researched.
    
UnderpinningResearch

    Two studies undertaken at UCL by Jane Fenoulhet (joined UCL 1983; Senior
      Lecturer 1992-2009;
      Professor since 2009) sought to elucidate the structure of the discipline
      of Dutch Studies. They
      focused particularly on the nature of the boundary between the disciplines
      of history and literature
      and the role of literary history in the curriculum and in research carried
      out by Dutch Studies
      departments. Two key aims of the research were i) the internationalisation
      of university curricula in
      Dutch Studies by using post-structuralist theory to challenge assumptions
      about the rigidity of
      these disciplinary boundaries, thus paving the way for a more fluid
      conceptualisation of Dutch
      Studies, and ii) to provide a critical perspective from outside the
      Netherlands and Flanders [b], [d].
    An early study (2004, [a]) contrasted internal and external perspectives
      on Dutch literary history,
      while subsequent research (2005-6) explored a historiographical shift to
      narrativism and renewed
      interest in the historical context of literature in the last decades of
      the twentieth century [b]. It
      examined the prefaces and introductions to histories of Dutch literature
      since 1925 to track shifts in
      the relationship of historicist thought to the study of literature.
      Demonstrating the fluidity of this
      relationship, the research recommended a renewed emphasis on cultural,
      social and political
      history within the Dutch Studies curriculum worldwide. A more practical
      study demonstrated the
      role that literature and literary history can play in university curricula
      outside the Netherlands and
      Flanders [c]. Thus the follow-up study (2007-8) focused on disciplinary
      practices outside the
      Netherlands and Flanders, using the UK as a case study [d]. Using research
      undertaken by
      Professors of Dutch Studies at the University of London between 1919 and
      1970, this genealogical
      study again focused on the boundaries between the disciplines of history
      and literature. More
      specifically, it tracked their separation from the nineteenth-century area
      of study known as Letters/
      Letteren &#8212; which persisted longer in the Netherlands than in the UK &#8212; into
      distinct academic
      disciplines. The study linked the increasing professionalisation of
      history to the denigration of
      historical work within Dutch Studies in London, a shift which correlated
      with its disappearance from
      the Dutch Studies curriculum in the field generally.
    Fenoulhet proposed the reinsertion of history into Dutch Studies and,
      ultimately, the latter's
      reconceptualisation as a multidisciplinary practice. She further suggested
      that Dutch Studies as
      institutionalised in the `home' countries of the Netherlands and Flanders
      &#8212; where the study of
      Dutch beyond the borders was referred to as `extra muros' and
      traditionally viewed as insignificant
      to the practice of the discipline `intra muros' &#8212; should adopt a more
      outward-facing and
      international perspective.
    