CaseStudyId: 34809
Title: 
    Pioneering user engagement using digital methods
    

ImpactDetails

    Research at DIS gives the public and museum visitors new ways to make
      sense of their heritage and engage in dialogue and partnerships with
      academics and curators. While other museums had previously used
      interactive displays, QRator is the first project in the world to allow
      visitors to enter into a conversation with museum professionals and other
      visitors, rather than simply absorbing what the labels tell them.
      Transcribe Bentham gives members of the public unprecedented access to
      primary historical material and the ability to take part in a project that
      adds to public understanding of history, philosophy and culture in Jeremy
      Bentham's time. Our research therefore benefits the public, whether they
      are museum visitors using interactive labels, or internet users employing
      crowd-sourcing, social media technologies or the internet of things. It
      has also had a profound impact on the work of cultural heritage
      professionals, museum curators, archivists, and special collections
      librarians.
    Engaging the public with historical records
    Transcribe Bentham enables the public to become part of the research
      process of interpreting historical documents &#8212; here untranscribed
      manuscripts by the 19th century philosopher Jeremy Bentham &#8212; in a way that
      was previously only possible for professional archivists and
      historians.[1] Since its public launch in September 2010, Transcribe
      Bentham has enabled 3,051 people from 21 countries to contribute to the
      transcription of over 5,862 documents (an estimated 2.9 million words),
      demonstrating a genuine public desire to contribute time and effort to
      preserving and making this archive accessible. Several users returned
      repeatedly and transcribed several different manuscripts.[2] The project
      has attracted widespread press and blog coverage as a new model for public
      participation and the unprecedented access it gives users, who have no
      previous training in palaeography, to unique historical materials: 31% of
      users enjoyed being part of the project because of an interest in history
      or philosophy [2,3].
    In 2011, Transcribe Bentham's innovative approach was recognised with the
      "Award of Distinction" in the "Prix Ars Electronica" &#8212; the world's
      foremost digital arts competition &#8212; in the Digital Communities category.
      The jury commented that: `this is likely the first initiative to open up
      such scholarly social research to the masses'. It was runner-up in the
      DISH Digital Heritage Award 2011 and the `Platforms for Networked
      Innovation' competition, run by the EU-funded Knetworks project and was
      nominated for EngageU Award (European Competition for best Innovations in
      University Outreach and Public Engagement) 2012.[4] The value of this
      approach was recognised through subsequent funding to develop and expand
      it: in 2012, the Mellon Foundation awarded Transcribe Bentham a grant
      [text removed for publication] to modify and improve the interface, and
      provide ongoing support to the user community, and it became part of an EU
      FP7 project on manuscript transcription: TranScriptorium, worth &#163;220,838.
    Further evidence of its success is the re-use of its open-source code by
      the Public Record Office of Victoria's for its transcription initiative.
      This will enable PROV to make historical records available to the public
      for the first time.
    Changing practices and improving visitor experience in museums
    Since its launch in March 2011, QRator has demonstrated the feasibility
      of social media as an outreach mechanism for the museum sector: it showed
      that given "radical trust", users behave responsibly. It has proven
      immensely successful at UCL's Grant Museum with 83% of over 4,300 comments
      between launch and July 2013 being on topic or about the museum as a whole
      (41% and 42% respectively) [8]. Assuming visitors leave one comment per
      visit, an estimated 1/3 of visitors to the museum have contributed, as
      opposed to the tiny number who previously wrote in the visitors book or
      spoke to staff. The comments have provided curators with insight into the
      needs and opinions of visitors, allowing them to better shape the visitor
      experience, and plan and present future exhibitions.
    Contributing to sector debate on museums and the public
    QRator attracted significant interest from the museums and scientific
      community during the impact period [5]. It was nominated for a Museums and
      the Web Best of the Web Award 2012 and won a UK Museums and Heritage Award
      for Excellence 2012 in the Innovation category: `The judges can see clear
      potential for use of this technology to be applicable to many different
      organisations and their collections. It is impressive in the way it
      encourages participation within museums but also, importantly, in
      maintaining that participation beyond the walls of the museum when
      visitors have returned home.' [6] Where many museums have `over-modernized
      with too much emphasis on interactive displays', QRator, described as
      `unobtrusive social media', blended easily with the classic exhibition
      style of the Grant Museum of Zoology [7]. QRator also featured in the
      highly prestigious NMC Horizon Report: Museum Edition 2011, which
      identified our work as a model for the rest of the sector: `Incorporates
      QR codes into exhibits that link to a rich database of curated content and
      allow users to document and share their own interpretations of the
      collections with each other.' [9] This is a highly selective publication
      about new technologies in museums: decisions about inclusion are made by
      an international committee of museum professionals and it is widely read
      and respected.
    Influencing practice in other museums
    The Horizon Report discusses the future of museums: two museum
      partnerships subsequently put this into practice. As a result of QRator's
      success, in 2011 the Imperial War Museums (IWM) invited us to collaborate
      on a bid to NESTA's Digital Research and Development Fund for Arts and
      Culture. It was ranked first of 495 applications [10]. This led to the
      Social Interpretation Project installed at IWM North and IWM Lambeth's A
        Family in Wartime exhibition. Its interactive methods, inspired by
      QRator, allowed visitors to enter into a digital conversation with
      curators and other visitors using social media, interactive touch screens,
      and the IWM website. Between July and December 2012, visitors to IWM North
      made 8,791 comments, 42% of which were on topic and 26% about the museum;
      between April and December 2012 visitors to IWM Lambeth made 18,115
      comments, 19% on topic and 33% about the museum. [11] Methods of digital
      interaction developed on QRator were thus applied successfully to a large
      national museum, allowing visitors to interact with exhibits and each
      other.
    QRator was also been deployed in the Museum of Brands as part of an Arts
      Council funded collaboration between UCL, The University of the Arts and
      various London museums (&#163;100,000 total funding: &#163;10,000 to QRator). As in
      the Grant Museum, about 1/3 of visitors made comments, and most found the
      experience enjoyable. [text removed for publication]
    
ImpactSummary

    Research in UCL Information Studies enables innovative forms of cultural
      interaction which encourages a deeper, more personal experience for the
      public. Our crowd-sourcing transcription project, Transcribe Bentham, has
      enabled a worldwide audience to participate in the transcription of
      previously unstudied manuscripts. Our QRator project has empowered museum
      visitors to think of exhibits as social objects, discussing them with
      other visitors and curators in three important museums via social media.
      Both have been recognised and imitated as ground-breaking methods of
      creating partnerships between the public, the academy and cultural
      heritage institutions.
    
UnderpinningResearch

    The study of how cultural heritage, memory institutions, libraries and
      archives engage with their users digitally has been a central research
      theme in UCL Information Studies (DIS) for many years. Often working in
      interdisciplinary teams, DIS researchers contribute to new knowledge by
      studying user/visitor expectations, behaviour and motivations, the
      adoption of digital applications and devices, analysing user behaviour and
      institutional response. The results enable the design of digital resources
      that are most suitable for their users. For example, recommendations of
      the LAIRAH project, that user studies should be incorporated into the
      design of new digital cultural heritage projects (AHRC funded 2005-6) [a]
      were used by JISC and AHRC to inform their funding decisions.
    QRator and our contribution to Transcribe Bentham grow out of this work:
      they involve research on user needs and behaviours, using methods we
      developed for the cultural heritage sector during the LAIRAH project, and
      make it possible for users to interact with their heritage using social
      media in ways that would have been impossible without digital methods. The
      research also investigates the range and efficacy of digital methods for
      broadening community engagement with cultural heritage.
    Transcribe Bentham (http://www.ucl.ac.uk/transcribe-bentham)
      seeks to understand how difficult a task users interested in culture and
      heritage can reasonably be asked to contribute to. Can an online audience
      transcribe historical handwritten documents in an academically rigorous
      fashion? Will crowd-sourcing document transcription be more effective, in
      terms of speed, accuracy, or user engagement, than directly employing a
      transcriber? Our project developed a unique online tool which allows users
      to participate in online transcription of heritage material in an entirely
      unprecedented fashion: users transcribe manuscript images, the
      transcription is moderated and added to an institutional repository [b].
    QRator (http://www.qrator.org)
      investigates these questions: can visitors to a museum be trusted to
      engage and answer challenging questions posed by a curator? Is it possible
      to elicit a dialogue between visitors and curators that encourages
      interpretation and analysis of objects, using digital methods such as
      iPads placed in the gallery? QRator allows visitors to interact both with
      each other and museum staff, rather than simply reading museum labels, via
      ten iPads mounted in the museum, or through QR codes and the Internet of
      Things enabled website [c, d]. We demonstrated that visitors are
      interested in engaging in complex dialogues regarding provenance and moral
      issues surrounding acquisition, retention and display [e].
    Both projects involved interdisciplinary teams from several departments.
      For Transcribe Bentham Professor Melissa Terras (DIS, Director: UCL Centre
      for Digital Humanities), the Co-Investigator, steered the project towards
      crowd-sourcing, advised on best practice in Digital Humanities and
      Digitisation, encouraged the uptake of the project via social media, and
      advised on the study of use and users in crowd-sourcing, whilst working
      closely with the University of London Computing Centre and the Bentham
      Project, led by the PI, Professor Philip Schofield (UCL Laws), in the
      development and publicity of the crowd-sourcing system. The QRator team
      consisted of Professor Claire Warwick (PI), Professor Melissa Terras (CI)
      and Claire Ross (named researcher) (all DIS). DIS researchers oversaw the
      design of the digital interaction and managed the study of visitor
      behaviour in the museum. Also part of the project were Dr Andy
      Hudson-Smith and Steven Gray (UCL Centre for Advanced Spatial Analysis),
      Dr Mark Carnall and Tonya Nelson (UCL Museums), and Professor Stuart
      Robson (UCL Civil, Environmental &amp; Geomatic Engineering).
    