CaseStudyId: 34805
Title: 
    Ordinary lives in the German dictatorships: Public understanding of
        and education on the Third Reich and the German Democratic Republic
    

ImpactDetails

    Recent German history continues to arouse strong emotions. Fulbrook's
      work on the German dictatorships has contributed to enhanced understanding
      among a range of beneficiaries, including regional government
      representatives, students in secondary, further and higher education,
      families of survivors and perpetrators, and members of the public
      nationally and internationally.
    Fulbrook's research has reached an international public audience, and
        in doing so has increased public engagement with an important but little
        discussed topic: not only the experiences of victims, but also the
      role of functionaries in keeping the machinery of the Third Reich running,
      as well as later self-representations. This impact was conveyed through
      the publication of a widely read book, substantial media appearances
      (including on television and radio and in newspapers) reaching several
      million people between 2012 and July 2013 alone [1].
    In the few months between publication (September 2012 in the UK, December
      2012 in the USA) and July 2013, A Small Town near Auschwitz, sold
      5,145 copies worldwide (hardback and ebook). It received acclamatory
      reviews in the international literary press. The New York Review of
        Books called it a `milestone in Holocaust historiography' (20 June
      2013; circ. 135,000). The Times Literary Supplement (15 February
      2013, circ. 100,000) suggested that `few bring the professional and the
      personal into such compelling conjunction'. Jonathan Yardley, reviewing
      what he called `this fine book' in the Washington Post (1 December
      2012, digital and print daily readership 474,767), says that the account
      is `absolutely necessary to an understanding' of the events and their
      wider significance. The Methodist Recorder (8 March 2013, 22,000)
      stated the book had relevance for understanding the human capacity for
      `complicity in evil acts' [1].
    The reach of this engagement was widened through radio programmes in
      several countries, including BBC Radio 3 Night Waves (27 September 2012;
      1.9m weekly station listeners); City Talk 105.9 (24 October 2012: 60,000);
      Radio City 97.7 (24 October 2012; 428,000) Newstalk Radio, Dublin (237,000
      daily listeners);. Circulation figures for newspaper coverage, in addition
      to the above, include: The Guardian (digital and print monthly
      readership 8.95 million), The Observer (223,588); BBC History
        magazine (80,009); Who Do You Think You Are? Magazine
      (22,642); Camden New Journal (69,323). Cross-media posting further
      widened visibility e.g. the Washington Post review was posted on
      the Auschwitz Museum Twitter feed (1 December 2012, 3,256 followers) and
      included in the American Society for Yad Vashem's bi-monthly journal Martyrdom
        and Resistance (January-February 2013). An interview with Marshall
      Poe for the `New Books in History' website was downloaded 34,500 times
      between December 2012 and July 2013.
    Between November 2012 and July 2013 Fulbrook also delivered public talks
      at home and abroad, including two of the biggest UK literary festivals at
      Oxford and Hay-on-Wye where audience numbers averaged some 400 and
      included members of the general public, along with historians, educators
      and people with personal connections to the Holocaust. Other events were
      organised by: the Pears Institute for the Study of Antisemitism; Spiro
      Ark; the Wiener Library; and the Institute for Jewish Studies. In New
      York, Fulbrook was invited to speak to public audiences at the Jewish Book
      Council in May 2012; Queens New York Jewish Community Council on 28 March
      2013; and the Fraternal Order of Bendiner-Sosnowicer on 31 March 2013,
      where survivors and members of families from the B&#281;dzin area were present
      [4].
    The significance of this impact was as diverse as the audiences.
      Individuals from both Jewish and non-Jewish backgrounds around the world
      have emphasised how much the book has affected their understanding of
        themselves, their families and communities. In the German press, for
      example, an open letter to Fulbrook in a Rheinland newspaper thanked her
      for both enlightening the writer about the `the big question of how it was
      ever possible for the "Third Reich" to have developed in what was a
      "Kulturnation"` as well as making aspects of the writer's own troubled
      relationship with his `ordinary perpetrator' father more comprehensible.
      Fulbrook has also received many personal e-mails. One German wrote: `On a
      personal level it was a veritable eye opener of how we as a family have
      rationalised my own grand-father's role in the fascist system'. An
      American wrote: `Most importantly, you have made me ask myself a very
      uncomfortable question. Where in 2012 are our blinkers?' A child of
      survivors wrote that this is `a personal and important book that should
      generate a lot of discussion about the German organizational structure
      that allowed the murder of our Polish Jewish families to happen with
      bureaucratic precision and antiseptic decision-making. And then convinced
      themselves that they were innocent.' Many more could be quoted [5].
    Fulbrook's research also contributed to changing the way in which the
        legacy of a German administrator was commemorated by his successors.
      Central to Fulbrook's research [d] was the complicated legacy of Udo
      Klausa (the former Nazi civilian administrator of B&#281;dzin and the first
      post-war Director of the Rhineland Regional Council (LVR) in North-Rhine
      Westphalia 1954-1975). On 30 May 2012 Fulbrook delivered a public lecture
      at D&#252;sseldorf University to an audience including current representatives
      of the Rhineland Regional Council. As a result of Fulbrook's research the
      Rhineland Regional Council withdrew from their website an adulatory
      biography of Klausa and amended their public exhibitions [6].
    Research on the GDR also reached a wide public through panel events and
      media presentations, leaving an online legacy in podcasts and transcripts.
      These ranged from an event with the President of the Humboldt University
      Berlin, through small discussions with former dissidents and Christians in
      a church in East Berlin, to an interview with Geraldine Doogue on
      `Saturday Extra', Australian Broadcasting Corporation's Radio National, 7
      November 2009 (weekly audience 126,000). The significance of Fulbrook's
      work on `perfectly normal lives' in the GDR for German self-understandings
      and public debates is reflected in both popular and scholarly reviews,
      including the prestigious daily Frankfurter Allgemeine Zeitung (14
      Jan 2009), the G&#246;ttingen Institute for Research on Democracy (18 May 2010)
      and the Institute for Civic Education [7].
    Fulbrook's research has influenced the teaching of modern German
        history in secondary schools, and been used to develop widely
        used educational resources. In 2007, she released a documentary film
      on the GDR, Behind the Wall: `Perfectly Normal Lives' in the GDR,
      based on the AHRC-sponsored collaborative research project and using
      archival material, location footage, and oral history interviews. 1,000
      copies of the film were distributed and it has been adopted for teaching
      and extracurricular purposes in universities and public education centres
      in the USA, Europe and the UK, such as Queen Mary University of London
      (QMUL); benefits for learning outcomes include the `appeal to students to
      learn about individual experience via filmed interviews' [8]. Sections of
      the film were also adopted as teaching materials for the OCR A Level
      history syllabus.
    Fulbrook was requested to write chapters 5 and 6 in Dictatorship and
        Democracy in Germany 1919-1963 (Heinemann: OCR History A Level,
      2008), and collate research-based sources for the accompanying LiveText
      materials and CD Rom. These materials were based on Fulbrook's GDR
      research, and constituted a major section of the module `Germany under
      Democracy and Dictatorship' in the OCR History A Level Board's revised
      syllabus. Since its adoption in 2008, over 6,500 copies have been sold and
      the newly revised materials have been positively reviewed by secondary
      educators for The Historical Association [9].
    Between 2008 and 2013 Fulbrook delivered 15 lectures in Sovereign
      Education programmes around the UK to audiences averaging 200-300 A level
      students and teachers. Sovereign Education state that her presentations
      `have always been a highlight for the students and their teachers' and
      that students and teachers `are aware of the valuable contribution she has
      made to their A level understanding and performance'. Indeed, `many go
      away inspired to continue their studies in history at university'. Their
      evaluation records cite an `animated and enthusiastic speaker who engaged
      the students with a good range of useful, relevant material and ideas'
      [10].
    
ImpactSummary

    The research has had an impact on public understanding of the contested
      German past. Pathways include public lectures, radio broadcasts, newspaper
      coverage, and the production of two documentary films as well as A Level
      source materials and school textbook chapters. The reach has included
      diverse audiences in Europe, the USA, Australasia and elsewhere. It has
      improved the knowledge and understanding of students and teachers in the
      UK, professionals involved in public history activities in Germany and
      interested members of the public. In the Rhineland, it has led to changes
      in how the legacies of former officials are commemorated. The research has
      been of particular personal significance to people variously grappling
      with the continuing legacies of Nazism and the Holocaust, and the East
      German dictatorship.
    
UnderpinningResearch

    Mary Fulbrook's research at UCL German has focussed on the ways in which
      people are both shaped by the historical periods into which they are born,
      and in turn contribute to sustaining, challenging and transforming the
      regimes through which they live. She has concentrated particularly on the
      German dictatorships of the twentieth century.
    Fulbrook's AHRC-funded (2002-06) research project on the German
      Democratic Republic (GDR) developed a more complex paradigm than that of
      the widely prevalent and politically useful but theoretically problematic
      notion of `totalitarianism'. Fulbrook and her team argued (for example
      [a], [b] below) that, in contrast to dichotomous approaches focussing on
      `state' versus `society', or `regime' versus `people', it is crucial to
      explore transformations of social attitudes and behaviour, and the ways in
      which East Germans were actively involved in a `participatory
      dictatorship'.
    Her research on generations in Germany from 1905 to 1995 [c], sought to
      bring together the levels of historical events and structures with
      patterns of behaviour and culturally filtered subjective experiences,
      analysed from the perspective of social generations. This research
      analysed the experiences of different age cohorts across the century, but
      focussed on two: the first `war youth generation', born in the first
      decade of the twentieth century, many of whom proved to be crucial
      carriers of Nazism (and a small minority of whom were among the founding
      fathers of the GDR); and the `1929ers', born in the later years of the
      Weimar Republic and socialised primarily under Nazism, but who in an
      extraordinary historical twist became the most reliable and committed
      supporters of the subsequent communist dictatorship, the GDR. By analysing
      the lives of selected individuals facing challenges distinctive to their
      generations, this project developed a new interpretation of experiences of
      living through the Third Reich and GDR, and, more generally, a new
      historical approach as `history from within'.
    In A Small Town near Auschwitz: Ordinary Nazis and the Holocaust
      [d], Fulbrook explored the development of Nazi racist policies and
      genocide in B&#281;dzin, a small town and county in Eastern Upper Silesia, just
      25 miles north of Auschwitz. Some 85,000 Jews were deported through the
      linked ghettos of B&#281;dzin-Sosnowiec; almost all the Jewish citizens of
      B&#281;dzin, around half the total population of this town, were murdered as a
      result of Nazi oppression; yet it has virtually escaped the attention of
      historians. Moreover, the role of mid-level civilian functionaries in
      creating the preconditions for the Holocaust has only recently become the
      subject of historical research. Civilian administrators have also almost
      entirely escaped public conceptions of `perpetrators', who are generally
      seen as those engaged in direct physical acts of violence rather than the
      behind-the- scenes administration of ghettoization and policies of
      stigmatisation, exploitation, expropriation and starvation. Fulbrook's
      research focused primarily on the role and later self-representations of
      the Landrat (chief executive or principal civilian administrator)
      of B&#281;dzin, Udo Klausa, who went on to a successful postwar career in the
      West German civil service as the first Director of the Rhineland Regional
      Council. Based on a range of sources, including private letters from the Landrat's
      wife during the war, contemporary archival sources, the records of
      subsequent legal investigations, the Landrat's 1980 memoirs, and
      survivor testimonies and oral history interviews, the book explores the
      implications of `systemic violence' and the role of German civilian
      administrators as `Hitler's willing functionaries'. It also reflects on
      the character of later memories, in an effort to probe beyond the familiar
      focus on acts of physical violence and atrocities, and on the subjective
      role of the historian in confronting this history.
    