CaseStudyId: 34808
Title: 
    Transforming the future of Silk Roads archaeology in Asia
    

ImpactDetails

    The Silk Roads thematic study and the Ancient Merv Project have
      transformed inter-state working
      of governmental and heritage agencies in the Asian region and have had a
      major impact on the
      conservation, management and interpretation of Silk Road archaeology.
    Listing as a World Heritage Site brings tourist and media attention, as
      well as access to
      international funding. The Silk Roads thematic study transformed
        the 26 partner countries'
        approach to the nomination of trans-national and serial properties.
      It created a conceptual
      framework of `corridors of movement' which now forms the basis of the Silk
      Roads World Heritage
      nomination strategy adopted by the 26 State Parties in 2011 [1] and
      implemented through two
      trans-national nominations in 2012 [2]. As a result two trans-boundary
      `corridors' have now been
      submitted to UNESCO [3, 4] and several more transnational dossiers are
      underway, demonstrating
      that active trans-boundary working has been achieved by states working in
      partnership. In addition,
      the research has created an overarching vision for the Silk Roads
      Statement of Outstanding
      Universal Value (containing key references for the effective management
      and protection of the
      World Heritage Site) which was agreed amongst the State Parties in 2012
      [2]. This agreement
      resolved more than 10 years of unfruitful discussion regarding chronology,
      site election, disparate
      tentative lists and the sites' key attributes [1, 2]. The researchers have
      been actively involved in
      working to improve the quality and scale of trans-boundary co-operation
      (for example, a keynote
      speech by Tim Williams at a meeting of 26 foreign and tourism ministers,
      organized by the
      UNWTO in Berlin, March 2013 [5]). The impact of this trans-national
      approach was also reflected in
      a commission from UNESCO to undertake a series of South Asian workshops in
      April 2013 and to
      be repeated in April 2014, and to write a thematic study on the Silk Roads
      nomination process for
      India, Nepal, Bhutan and China in 2014.
    UCL research into the scale, range and geographic diversity of the
      archaeological evidence of the
      Silk Roads changed the focus of the State Parties from simply focusing on
      large individual cities or
      spectacular monuments to a more holistic approach to the complexity of the
      Silk Roads
      archaeology. It has focused the attention of government and heritage
      agencies in the Asian region
      on key sites and landscapes and the project has had a major impact on site
      protection and
      management, as evidenced by the attention to the protection and
      interpretation of smaller sites,
      approaches to sustainable development and integrated education programmes
      in the nomination
      dossiers [3, 4]. Research also helped to show governments that a holistic
      approach to the Silk
      Roads would have beneficial impacts on tourism, leading to a series of
      high level government
      meetings to discuss and plan trans-national tourism initiatives [5]. The
      identification of smaller sites
      and landscapes, within broader corridors of movement, has provided the
      platform for a new United
      Nations World Tourism Organisation (UNWTO) approach to Silk Roads tourism
      [5].
    Impact on heritage conservation, preservation, interpretation and
        education in Central Asia
    In addition to providing a framework which focused State Party activities
      and the development of
      tourism in the region, our continuing research there has enhanced heritage
      preservation,
      conservation and presentation at the Merv Park World Heritage Site in
      Turkmenistan itself, and
      more widely in the region through skills, knowledge and resource
      transfers. Our first phase of
      collaborative work, led at UCL by Georgina Herrmann (1992-2000), led in
      1999 to the listing of
      Merv itself as a World Heritage Site; Herrmann also contributed a
      five-year management plan to
      the listing bid document [6]. More recently, and during the REF impact
      census period, a team
      coordinated by Kirsty Norman (UCL-based Project Officer since 2007) in
      collaboration with the
      Ancient Merv Park and the Turkmen Ministry of Culture drafted a new
      2012-17 Management Plan
      [7] for the World Heritage Site. Conservation work on site focused on the
      reburial of excavations,
      artefact conservation and museum storage. In addition, the team under the
      supervision of Louise
      Cooke (Project Research Assistant from 2003) carried out conservation work
      which addressed the
      particular needs of earthen architecture: examining reburial, sacrificial
      approaches and the role of
      traditional forms of maintenance [8].
    Our research in earthen architecture conservation has developed the
      Turkmen approach to
      internationally recognised standards of minimum intervention, in contrast
      to the previous approach
      of extensive restoration [8]; this has led to more sustainable approaches
      including the revival of
      lost skills in traditional techniques of earthen material manufacturing
      and maintenance [9]. Capacity
      building in artefact conservation and museum storage, for Turkmen museum
      and park staff (14
      individuals) and students (12 individuals) who do not otherwise have
      access to training between
      September 2011 and May 2013, has helped to establish more effective
      systems for the retrieval,
      storage, conservation and display of the archaeological objects in local
      institutions [9].
    The management planning for the Merv World Heritage Site prompted
      specific advances in
      heritage protection, including the national implementation in January 2013
      of `buffer zones' (to
      prevent incursion up to their boundaries) for all the designated monuments
      in the country (5,000+)
      [9], and a Russian version has been requested by the other Central Asian
      republics. Two
      workshops for national heritage professionals, in 2011 and 2012, led by
      researchers on
      documentation and condition surveys significantly enhanced these processes
      in the country and
      have led to the revision and computerisation of the Soviet-era Monument
      Passport System
      enabling quicker/more efficient response to threats, by improving both the
      quality and
      dissemination of information [9]. These workshops, attended by 20 staff
      from the State Park
      Service, were the first of their kind in the region.
    The research into 3D laser scanning undertaken at Merv in 2009 for
      documentation and monitoring
      of earthen architecture (www.cyark.org/ancient-merv-intro)
      has been used as a model for other
      programmes [10] and was selected as one of featured case studies at the
      launch of CyARK's 500
      initiative (to document 500 of the world's most important heritage sites)
      in October 2013,
      demonstrating innovative applications of existing technologies (http://archive.cyark.org/500/).
    In addition, an urban archaeological recording manual (adapted from
      previous work at the Museum
      of London) was developed, with specific modules designed to tackle the
      complexity of recording of
      earthen architecture and archaeology, the advanced in digital recording
      systems, and tackled
      Central Asia preservation conditions: this was produced in both English
      and Turkmen. This manual
      was widely disseminated (over 100 copies), which have influenced
      professional approaches to
      recording complex stratigraphy throughout the region (English version
      currently in use in
      Uzbekistan and Kazakhstan) [10]. The aerial survey work in 2011-2013 led
      to a redefinition of the
      boundaries of the Merv Park World Heritage Site in 2013, and discussions
      regarding the inclusion
      of the important early Islamic city of Shaim Kala [9,10].
    Archaeological excavations, landscape research, monument documentation
      and historic
      photographic research have provided detailed interpretive information
      which was synthesised in
      2009 into a `guides pack' and used to train and support tourism guides,
      enhancing the quality and
      range of interpretation, and diversifying destinations within the site
      [11]. The Teachers Handbook
      and workshops have substantially increased the use of the site by schools
      groups (c. 25 school
      visits in 2003 to c. 500 today), as well as transforming the approach to
      learning from a descriptive
      authorised discourse to evidence-based learning [11]. An adapted version
      of this handbook was
      requested by the park managers of all the seven State Archaeological Parks
      in Turkmenistan [10]
      and its reach was extended when the book was adapted to sites outside the
      region, e.g. for Tell
      Balata in Palestine, published in January 2013 [12]. In collaboration with
      local counterparts,
      therefore, the project was able to encourage positive changes in heritage
      management and
      heritage legislation in the country through influencing highest levels of
      the government in
      Turkmenistan and, through the ICOMOS research, all along the historic Silk
      Roads.
    
ImpactSummary

    Research for the UNESCO trans-national World Heritage nomination of the
      Silk Roads led to a
      radical new policy framework for undertaking serial nominations (thematic
      groups of sites across
      state boundaries). The `Silk Roads Thematic Study' transformed the
      attitudes of governments and
      heritage agencies in the region and had a major impact on conservation,
      management,
      interpretation and heritage tourism. This study was supported by a
      long-term site-specific project
      undertaken at the ancient city of Merv in Turkmenistan. By developing
      education strategies with
      local teachers and transforming national approaches to heritage (through
      conservation training,
      management planning, and interpretation) the `Ancient Merv Project' is now
      an exemplar of best
      practice throughout the Silk Roads World Heritage Project.
    
UnderpinningResearch

    UCL Institute of Archaeology has conducted field research at the World
      Heritage site of Ancient
      Merv (Turkmenistan) since the early 1990s. Merv, one of the most important
      strategic centres on
      the Silk Roads, dates from the 6th century BC to the 13th century AD. In
      our first programme of
      research, led by Georgina Herrmann (then Reader in Archaeology at UCL)
      between 1992 and
      2000 in collaboration with the British Museum and the National Institute
      for the History of
      Turkmenistan, the buildings were extensively documented and the evolution
      of this long-lived city
      was reconstructed and interpreted [a, b].
    Between 2002 and 2013 a team at UCL, led by Tim Williams (Senior Lecturer
      in Managing
      Archaeological Sites since 2002; Director of the Ancient Merv Project),
      conducted a further UCL-led
      programme of research at Ancient Merv, which underpinned the research of
      the Silk Roads
      Thematic Study. This more recent project focused on the archaeology of the
      Islamic city (7th-13th
      centuries AD) and encompassed a wide-range of detailed work including
      excavations, a systematic
      aerial survey using an Unmanned Aerial Vehicle, heritage management,
      interpretation and
      education. The team has developed various datasets including aerial
      imagery, GIS interpretations,
      extensive historical and contemporary photography, and high resolution
      laser scan data [c, d].
    The Merv project underpinned a second strand of research conducted
      between 2008 and 2013.
      The project team (Tim Williams, supported by UCL Research Assistants Paul
      Wordsworth and
      Gaygysyz Jorayev) carried out research in support of the UNESCO World
      Heritage Silk Roads
      serial trans-national nomination project. A Silk Roads thematic study,
      undertaken for ICOMOS
      (International Council on Monuments and Sites) between 2010 and 2013,
      aimed to help the 26
      State Parties involved in the nomination to identify and conserve
      potential sites and provide a wider
      intellectual context for the Silk Roads, stretching from East Asia to the
      Mediterranean between the
      2nd century BC to the 16th century AD. The project team explored a variety
      of data sources,
      examining site types, historic and modern maps, ecological and topographic
      information. The
      project mapped, in a GIS system, over 50,000 kilometres of routes,
      covering an area of 16 million
      square kilometres, and drew together data on over 10,000 individual sites.
      The data was
      subsequently analysed to explore geographical, chronological and
      socio-political variations in site
      types and through these to better understand the complexity of ancient
      Silk Road societies [e].
    In exploring the scale, range and geographic diversity of the
      archaeological evidence, a new
      holistic approach to the archaeology of the Silk Roads was developed which
      enabled the
      identification of key landscapes and sites across a wider area. This
      focused on `corridors of
      movement' rather than narrowly defined `routes' between large cities or
      spectacular monuments.
      The complexity of the archaeology, and the multifaceted character of the
      Silk Roads, was revealed,
      including the inter-relationship of activities, the impacts of political
      control on adaptation and
      development as well as shifting pathways of control and exploitation. The
      research led to a more
      nuanced appreciation of the impacts of the Silk Roads on communities,
      emphasising the
      significance of short to medium distance exchanges and the pivotal role of
      the central areas in
      promoting interactions. Importantly, it has also challenged the
      traditional east-west focus of Silk
      Roads dialogues by highlighting the north-south routes, particularly the
      interactions with the steppe
      regions to the north and the South Asian societies to the south [e].
    