CaseStudyId: 34816
Title: 
    Communities and their heritages: The impact of research in
        participatory archives and other heritage practices
    

ImpactDetails

    A major contribution of UCL DIS research has been in raising the
        profile of community-based
        heritage activity and recognition of its significance in the UK and
        internationally. This impact has
      been strongest in terms of perceptions of community archives, and is
      demonstrated by the
      increased funding and formal acknowledgement for community-based archive
      projects. Between
      2008 and 2013 research findings were disseminated to professional
      archivists through articles in
      practitioners' journals (e.g. [a], [b], [c], [d] and [f] in section 3), in
      other publications aimed at largely
      professional audiences [e], at workshops and conferences organised by
      professional bodies in the
      UK (London, Manchester, Oxford, Liverpool, Brighton, Preston, Aberystwyth,
      Llandrindod Wells,
      Edinburgh, Dundee and Glasgow), internationally (Ireland, Sweden, United
      States, Canada and
      Australia) and at the International Council on Archives congresses in
      Kuala Lumpur (2008) and
      Brisbane (2012) [1]. With audiences ranging from 20 to 200, a total of
      about 2,000 archive and
      heritage professionals, members of funding bodies and policymakers heard
      discussion of our
      research and its findings during this period.
    This widespread dissemination of the research has been instrumental in
      creating awareness of the
      significance of community-based archives and community-based heritage
      activity in the
      professional sector. Although no one would claim that this is exclusively
      due to DIS research, it has
      certainly been an important contributor, as explicitly recognised in both
      the UK and internationally.
      In 2008, for example, the President of the Society of Archivists urged
      fellow professionals to read
      article [a] which `far more effectively than I could do here, [makes] the
      case for seeing community
      archives as an important part of the overall archival attempt to capture
      the history of society in all
      its diversity' [2]. A former senior manager at the National Archives of
      Canada, referring to [e],
      emphasised the significance of the research for contemporary archival
      thinking and practice and
      credited Flinn with being `an early and prominent voice in bringing the
      community archives
      perspective to the attention of the profession' [3]. The former national
      archivist and librarian of the
      United States Virgin Islands and a leading North American commentator on
      archival issues
      reflected on the influence of Flinn on a new generation of North American
      archive professionals,
      `Community archives is his area, I don't think there is anyone else...I
      would say his work has been
      foundational' [4].
    This new awareness has contributed to broader and more inclusive
      perspectives on professional
      practice for archivists and other heritage workers. A tangible result of
      this may be seen in the fact
      that in 2011 the Archives and Records Association (ARA, formerly the
      Society of Archivists)
      acknowledged the significance of community archives by the Chair and Chief
      Executive of the new
      association addressing the annual UCL community archives conference and
      inviting the
      Community Archives and Heritage Group (CAHG) and its approximately 400
      members to become
      a special interest group within ARA. When ARA looked for someone to give
      an overview of the
      developments in the last ten years for community archives in their
      professional magazine ARC, the
      editors asked Flinn [5]. This has also affected funding policy: the
      Heritage Lottery Fund (HLF) sees
      the funding of community heritage even in a time of austerity as a
      priority, introducing in its
      strategic framework for 2013-2018 a new fund, `Sharing Heritage',
      specifically targeting community
      heritage activity and extending the scope of existing community-focussed
      programmes such as
      `Our Heritage' from &#163;50,000 to &#163;100,000 [6]. The AHRC included `community
      heritage' as a strand
      in its Connected Communities research theme, for which Flinn was invited
      to participate in an
      Expert Consultation Event in 2009.
    Much of the DIS research has focused on better understanding the
      motivations and significance of
      community-based heritage and archive activity, and has changed practices
      in a number of areas.
      Flinn has been closely associated with the development of the advocacy
      body CAHG since 2005,
      and that body and its members had a mutual interest in the research,
      informing it and benefiting
      from it, and were thus close participants in the research process. The
      knowledge of the variety,
      significance and challenges faced by community archives acquired through
      the research [a, b, c]
      directly impacted Flinn's drafting of the community archives movement
      vision statement, which
      `informed and continues to inform the essence of what [CAHG] do'. The CAHG
      chair notes: `There
      is a two-way relationship that then evolves; Andrew's work in raising the
      profile and scoping and
      defining the field, impacts and benefits CAHG members and the work of CAHG
      members benefits
      and informs Andrew's understandings of what community archives are and can
      be' [7].
    DIS research on community-based heritage has influenced debates and
      policy on archives and
      heritage in London and beyond. For instance, Flinn was an invited member
      on the Mayor of
      London's Heritage Diversity Task Force (HDTF) Archives Diversification
      Sub-committee (2007-
      2009), drafting the sub-committee's final report and jointly authoring a
      section in the HDTF report
      which was sent to all London arts, heritage and archival institutions and
      policymakers stressing the
      vital role of independent community-based archive activity in the context
      of London's diverse
      populations [8]. He also spoke on an expert panel at the cross-domain
      Cultural Equalities Now
      conference at the British Museum (2011), and was consulted by the HLF in
      its discussions on the
      evaluation of `success' of its funding of community-based heritage and
      oral history work (2013).
      Stevens contributed reflections from the findings of the Community
        Archives and Identities
      research and community-based heritage activity into publications for the
      think tank IPPR, notably
      `Stories Old and New, Migration and Identity in the UK heritage sector: A
      report for the Migration
      Museum Working Group' (2009) has been crucial to the direction and ongoing
      work of the
      Migration Museum Project to create the UK's first major museum of
      migration [9].
    Having identified the challenges and opportunities faced by
      community-based archives [b, c, e],
      researchers worked collaboratively with individual archives and led
        workshops to provide training
        and develop skills. For instance, between 2009 and 2013, researchers
      advised the Black Cultural
      Archives, South Asian Diaspora Literature and Arts Archive (SALIDAA), the
      National Centre for
      Carnival Arts Carnival Archive, Eastside Community Heritage, ALDATERRA,
      Hoxton Hall and most
      recently the proposed UK Disabled People's Movement Archive (UKDPMA),
      among others, on
      different aspects of community-based archival and heritage practice. In
      some cases this has taken
      the form of a one-off advisory session, in others it has been a more
      sustained and long-term
      collaboration and engagement. Research on community-based heritage
      practice and ethics led to
      guidance to Hoxton Hall which, according to their Heritage and Education
      Officer, `supported us to
      shape and deliver a project (Shoreditch Storybank) that is of real
      relevance to the community of
      Shoreditch and our organisation', and the advice was then built into a
      large on-going HLF-funded
      project to develop the Hall and explore its community heritage [10].
      According to ALDATERRA
      Projects, research-based advice enabled them to identify new streams of
      relevant HLF and AHRC
      funding which supported the development of the organisation, and on
      projects such as the Living
      Archaeology of the Place `enabled a specialist competence to be brought
      into our work' [11].
    Drawing on the collaborative approaches discussed in [c], researchers
      delivered ten workshops
      between 2009 and 2013 on archival skills, ethical research practice,
      digital preservation,
      dissemination and intellectual property and models for community-based
      heritage collaborations to
      community groups. Research findings were presented formally and informally
      at seven successive
      UCL-hosted Community Archives conferences. These conferences are attended
      by 150 delegates
      annually, including community groups, heritage professionals and
      policymakers. As a member of
      the organising group Flinn guided and directed the themes and messages
      conveyed to the wider
      membership, providing an unrivalled opportunity to discuss and disseminate
      the outcomes of
      research to the audience it most directly related to. For example, a
      finding of Community Archives
        and Identities research was the extent to which the survival of
      materials collected and created by
      community archives and heritage groups was endangered by digital
      instability [c, d]. Once this
      need was identified, researchers led by Stevens organised a digital
      curation workshop in 2009, as
      well as talks at community archive conferences on digital preservation.
      Eveleigh was asked by the
      City Archives of Amsterdam to advise and collaborate on the motivations
      underpinning successful
      participatory archive and heritage projects, while Sexton has been invited
      to address professional
      audiences in Italy about her research on collaborative heritage practice
      as part of the Dig Where
        We Stand team. In addition, Eveleigh was commissioned, with Flinn,
      to produce guidance on
      digital preservation guidance for community groups, which was disseminated
      to community
      archives via the Community Archives and Heritage Group. According to the
      CAHG Chair, this was
      an important model of `turning academic research into something very
      practical and very usable
      which is very important to a sector where the whole point is to engage in
      a practical process and
      produce meaningful and lasting end products ... it was a perfect way in
      which that [research]
      expertise can be made accessible to community archives to fulfil a
      knowledge gap' [7].
    
ImpactSummary

    Research in UCL Information Studies on participatory and community-based
      approaches to
      archival and heritage activity has improved understanding of the
      motivations, impacts and
      challenges of these endeavours. This has led to the following impacts: (1)
      a higher public and
      professional profile for participatory and community-based archiving and
      heritage activities,
      including a better understanding of the motivations for such activities
      and of the significance of the
      engagement with such materials and activities, notably for the diversity
      and democratisation of
      cultural and knowledge production and for individual and collective senses
      of identity, and (2) the
      challenges and hurdles such approaches face, and some of the tools and
      collaborative approaches
      that can be used to overcome challenges.
    
UnderpinningResearch

    Researchers at the archives and records research centre (ICARUS) in UCL
      Information Studies
      (DIS) are active in investigating the significance of archives and more
      participatory or community-based
      approaches to archiving and heritage activities for individuals and
      different communities. For
      the last 15 years public policy and professional discourse has stressed
      the contribution that
      participating in archival and other heritage activities can make to
      individual well-being and
      community cohesion by encouraging a sense of belonging, identity and
      social capital. Yet, much of
      the evidence for these impacts has been anecdotal and superficial [a, b
      and d]. The research
      activity carried out by ICARUS, examines the complex relationship between
      community-based
      archiving and heritage work, personal and collective identity, the impact
      of participatory
      approaches for professional and non-professional practice and thinking,
      and the challenges that
      such approaches face. This research seeks to understand the motivations
      and impacts of
      community-based archive and heritage activity, investigate the problems
      and suggest solutions
      including the role of heritage professions in supporting such activities
      [c, e]. Research was led by
      Dr Andrew Flinn (2004-), with Professor Elizabeth Shepherd, Dr Mary
      Stevens (Community
        Archives and Identities 2008-2009), collaborative doctoral award
      researchers Alexandra Eveleigh
      (2010-) and Anna Sexton (2011-), and UCL's AHRC-funded multi-disciplinary
      research for
      community heritage team Dig Where We Stand (2012-).
    The Community Archives and Identities project identified the
      significance of some of the collections
      held by community-based archives and established the varied motivations
      for engaging in such
      activities (e.g. articulation of identity and right to representation,
      assertion of civil rights, community
      education, social production and dissemination of knowledge). It
      demonstrated the complex yet
      generally positive individual and collective benefits that engaging with
      community-based archives
      and heritage can bring, such as a contribution to a personal and
      collective sense of belonging and
      shared identity; a range of practical skills; the creation, preservation
      and dissemination to young
      people, among others, of histories and historical materials frequently
      overlooked or ignored [b]. It
      also provided compelling evidence of the significant challenges to
      sustaining mainly volunteer-run
      community-based heritage activities (restricted financial and physical
      resources, moving from
      project-based to more permanent models of existence, surviving
      generational change, and the
      challenge of successfully preserving fragile digital materials) and made
      suggestions as to how
      archivists, other heritage professionals, funding bodies and academics
      might better support
      community-based heritage groups to meet and overcome these challenges [c,
      e]. The Dig Where
        We Stand and Continuing to Dig research for community
      heritage projects examined how
      university research expertise can be utilised to support, enhance and
      ultimately co-develop
      community-based heritage activities. An exploration of the creative
      collaborative possibilities of
      technology in supporting community engagement with heritage institutions
      has been the basis of
      joint research projects with The National Archives and the Wellcome
      Library [d]. Finally this
      research is placed within a strong international context by studies
      focusing on the use of archives
      and heritage in pursuit of social justice, e.g. in [f], published in
      collaboration with Professor Wendy
      Duff and Karen Suurtamm, University of Toronto and Dr David Wallace,
      University of Michigan.
    