CaseStudyId: 34810
Title: 
    Facet analysis and its influence on the major systems of library
        classification
    

ImpactDetails

    Classification research in DIS has had significant impacts on the design
      of new versions of two major library classification systems, the Universal
      Decimal Classification (UDC) and Dewey Decimal System (DDC), cumulatively
      used by over 350,000 libraries around the world. Most existing
      classification systems originate before the computer age, employ pragmatic
      ideas of knowledge organisation, and lack a sound theoretical basis. Facet
      analysis on the BC2 model offers solutions to some of these issues and
      enables more accurate representation of subject content, especially
      important for online searching and discovery. Of particular importance is
      the research into classification in the humanities, and the special
      challenges of culture-specific concepts and terminology which they
      present; effective ways of managing these difficulties allow for the
      elimination of cultural bias which is evident in many older systems, and
      the creation of schemes which are more acceptable to minority users.
    Impact on the design of UDC library classification
    The UDC is an international classification, available in 40 languages,
      and used in more than 150,000 bibliographic databases, documentation
      centres and libraries in around 130 countries, notably in central and
      eastern Europe, where it is the dominant scheme [1]. UDC has to exhibit a
      consistent and logical structure &#8212; such as that offered by facet analysis
      &#8212; because of its use in scientific and technical research establishments,
      as well as general academic collections, and its application to
      documentation as well as books. Collections include VINITI &#8212; All-Russian
      Scientific and Technical Information Institute of Russian Academy of
      Sciences (28 million records), NEBIS &#8212; The Network of Libraries and
      Information Centres in Switzerland (3m), Romanian Science and Technology
      Portal (3m), the national libraries and bibliographies of Slovakia (4m),
      Slovenia (3.5m), Hungary, Czech Republic, Croatia, Poland, Finland,
      Serbia, Spain and Portugal [1]. Facet analysis also provides for a data
      structure that is compatible with the maintenance of the classification in
      a database format, and for its machine management. As Ines Cordeiro (UDC
      Editor-in-Chief 2007-2011, Deputy Director of the National Library of
      Portugal and former doctoral student in DIS) reported in 2007, BC2
      provided a model for UDC to achieve its organisational goal of developing
      a classification suitable for online environments, not just one designed
      for better shelf arrangement [4].
    In the 1990s UDC agreed to make BC2 the basis of all new revisions of the
      UDC, using its terminologies and adopting its faceted structure within the
      UDC format. In 1997, DIS researcher Broughton joined the Editorial Team to
      help achieve this goal, presenting the principles of facet analysis to
      editorial workshops, helping to establish editorial policy and practice,
      and working on the conversion of BC2 classes to UDC format. Her
      identification of the Genesis Problem [d] demonstrates the difficulty of
      representing, in a relational database, subject content and terminology
      that is specific to particular cultures and traditions. She also developed
      several new auxiliary schedules, which assign common facets across classes
      [2].
    In 2000, Broughton created an entirely new Religion classification, based
      on her work on BC2 [3]. This was incorporated into the 2005 edition of UDC
      and applied to all accessions in religion since. Between 2008 and 2013,
      books in 130 countries were classified using this system.
    Broughton`s work on Religion [3] provided precedent for editors
      developing other UDC classes. In 2009, a working group led by Claudio
      Gnoli began updating Philosophy, explicitly `trying to follow the pattern
      of facet presentation introduced in the Class 2 Religion by Vanda
      Broughton' [5], and using her expertise in humanities classification [f].
    Revision of the important Class 61 Medicine was announced in 1995. In
      2009, its editors, including Ia McIlwaine, outlined the process of
      adapting BC2 [6] and how auxiliary schedules created by Broughton were a
      major factor in rationalising its structure: `In phase 1, a framework for
      the new class was established ... Bliss terminology was used in the
      captions together with UDC notation and formatting as needed. Concepts and
      terms, the common auxiliaries, and classes related to medicine were used
      insofar as they were appropriate. There was heavy use of common auxiliary
      tables of general characteristics (Table 1k) -02 Properties, -04 Relations
      and Processes, and -05 Persons' [7].
    In 2011, Broughton was invited to explain the BC2 structure of physical
      sciences at the UDC Editorial Workshop, and the following year BC2
      principles were also considered in the revision of the mathematics class,
      with work beginning in 2013 [8].
    Impact on the design of the Dewey library classification system
    The Dewey Decimal Classification (DDC) has been translated into more than
      30 languages and serves library users in over 200,000 libraries in 135
      countries, making it the world`s most widely used library classification
      system.
    Dewey was consistently criticised for its Class 200, Religion, in which
      Christianity and the Bible occupied numbers 220-289, with all other
      religions sharing 290-299. A 2005 user survey confirmed this general
      discontent with the Religion Class, and with its far greater weighting of
      Christianity compared with other religions [9]. In 2006, following the
      publication of the new UDC Class 2 Religion, the then-Editor of the DDC
      Joan Mitchell proposed collaboration with McIlwaine for a revision
      incorporating many features of Broughton`s UDC schedule into the 22nd
      edition of Dewey [10].
    When released in 2011, the top structure of the new DDC class mirrored
      almost exactly the UDC structure as designed by Broughton. A separate
      publication, `developed for libraries with extensive religion collections'
      appeared in 2012 [11]. This featured `an optional arrangement for the
      Bible and specific religions based on a chronological/regional view, in
      order to help reduce Christian bias in the standard notational sequence
      for the Bible and specific religions, based on a similar development
      introduced in the UDC in 2000' [10]. Between its release in 2012 and 31
      July 2013, 178,000 books in the field of religion were added to the
      WorldCat database maintained by the Online Computer Library Centre (OCLC),
      which also publishes and maintains Dewey; the majority will have received
      a new DDC number using this system [12].
    Between them UDC and DDC are used as organising and retrieval tools for
      collections in 350,000 libraries across the world. Facet analysis, the
      focus of DIS research, has been instrumental in addressing such issues as
      logical structure, currency, cultural neutrality, and machine
      compatibility in both of these, two of the three leading systems of
      library classification. The influence of faceted classification in general
      and BC2 in particular has ensured that its advantages are available to
      millions of library users.
    
ImpactSummary

    Research on the theory and design of faceted classifications as
      exemplified in the Bliss Bibliographic Classification 2nd edition (BC2)
      has influenced the recent development of two out of the three
      internationally important library classification schemes, the Universal
      Decimal Classification, and the Dewey Decimal Classification. Collectively
      these are used in over 350,000 libraries worldwide, and thousands of new
      publications in the relevant subject classes are now classified using
      systems based on research undertaken in UCL Information Studies.
    
UnderpinningResearch

    Facet analysis is a powerful methodology for building knowledge
      organisation systems such as classification schemes, thesauri, taxonomies
      and ontologies [d, e]. It was originally devised by a UCL graduate, S. R.
      Ranganathan, in the 1930s, and taken up in the 1950s by the UK
      Classification Research Group (CRG), who greatly refined and elaborated
      the methodology, and developed a body of theoretical research which forms
      a significant part of the overall corpus of research literature in the
      fields of indexing and information retrieval. UCL research in this field
      is now led by Professor Vanda Broughton (UCL Information Studies, or DIS,
      since 1997 and a member of CRG from the early 1970s).
    Facet analysis builds classification from `the bottom up' on the basis of
      a detailed examination of the concepts in a given discipline or subject
      field [b]. Concepts are assigned to a series of categories (or facets)
      which are largely functional, or linguistic in nature (entities, parts,
      materials, processes, operations, products, agents). Relationships between
      concepts in a facet, and between the facets themselves, are established,
      and the rules for combination (the system syntax) are derived from the
      structure, within the conventions and needs of the particular discipline.
      Although there is an established body of theory, different disciplines
      present particular difficulties in the work of intellectual analysis.
      Research in DIS also involves the investigation of potential new
      fundamental categories, and the encoding of data to represent the
      structural properties of concepts and their interrelationships. This has
      applications not only in libraries, but in machine management, and today
      there are many examples of faceted applications in e-commerce, online
      searching, etc. Much DIS research has focused on the management and
      representation of faceted systems in digital formats which support such
      implementations [c].
    DIS is the institutional base for development of the second edition of
      the Bliss Bibliographic Classification (BC2). The original Bibliographic
      Classification (BC1) was a well-regarded classification system widely used
      in UK academic and research libraries until the 1990s, when, for financial
      reasons, it was largely replaced by the Dewey Decimal and Library of
      Congress Classifications. The development of BC2, which started in 1977,
      resulted in a series of highly structured classifications for different
      disciplines, which provide a model of a faceted system built on
      theoretical principles. DIS researchers have developed new terminologies
      for specific subject fields including religion, the fine arts and
      chemistry [a].
    The AHRC-funded FATKS project (2002-2003, PI V. Broughton) in DIS
      examined the viability of applying a faceted approach to humanities
      vocabulary, and developed an indexing and search tool for two humanities
      disciplines, religion and the arts; outputs included the creation of a
      relational database, and software for the automatic building of classmarks
      [f]. The project documentation and the demonstrator are published on the
      FATKS website, http://www.ucl.ac.uk/fatks/about.htm.
      DIS researchers working on faceted classification included Professor Ia
      McIlwaine (Head of DIS 1993-2001, Editor-in-Chief of the Universal Decimal
      Classification (UDC) from 1993-2007), who was responsible for the
      implementation of a faceted structure into UDC; Dr Aida Slavic (research
      associate on the FATKS project 2002-2003, former DIS doctoral student, and
      Editor-in-Chief of UDC from 2011) developed the relational database and
      search interface for the faceted humanities vocabulary.
    