CaseStudyId: 34815
Title: 
    Buccal midazolam: a novel treatment for generalised convulsive seizures
    

ImpactDetails

    As a result of the underpinning research described above, buccal
      midazolam has become the drug of choice for the treatment of status
      epilepticus in the community, quoted in guidelines as part of the care
      pathway for status epilepticus. It was included as first-line therapy in
      the Advanced Paediatric Life Support (APLS) status epilepticus algorithm
      for the first time in 2005 [a]. In the same year, the Scottish
      Intercollegiate Guidelines Network recommended the same, citing our study
      directly [b].
    Both available pharmaceutical formulations of buccal midazolam have
      arisen as a result of work conducted at UCL. The first, Epistatus
      (midazolam maleate), was developed by Scott and Neville at ICH, and was
      brought to market under a commercial licence agreement between UCL
      Business and Special Products Ltd [c]. It has been employed
      clinically for over 10 years, being manufactured under a `specials'
      licence issued by the MHRA. The second, Buccolam (midazolam
      hydrochloride), arose from work conducted at UCL School of Pharmacy and
      resulted in the foundation of Therakind Limited, a spin-out company
      designed to develop the product further. In 2010, a controlling
      interest in Therakind was sold to ViroPharma Inc. [d], and in
      2011, Therakind was granted a centralised Paediatric Use Marketing
      Authorisation (PUMA) by the European Medicines Agency (EMA) for Buccolam
      as a treatment of prolonged acute seizures in individuals 3 months to 18
      years of age, the first of its kind [e]. The pharmacokinetic and
      pharmacodynamic properties of Buccolam described within the EMA
      application cite and rely upon the initial data generated on buccal
      midazolam at the ICH [1, above] [f].
    This authorisation has allowed distribution and access to Buccolam to the
      one million children and adolescents with epilepsy in Europe. Importantly,
      as Buccolam is a licensed product (unlike almost all other paediatric
      prescriptions), it is easier to obtain as a repeat prescription in the
      community rather than having to return to secondary or tertiary care &#8212; a
      significant advantage for patients/caregivers.
    In 2012, buccal midazolam was recommended in NICE Clinical Guideline 137
      on Epilepsy as first line therapy for treating children, young people and
      adults with prolonged or repeated generalised, convulsive seizures in the
      community [g].
    In addition to the inclusion in National Guidelines, buccal midazolam is
      included in many local guidelines for treatment of status epilepticus in
      the UK, for example North Bristol NHS Trust [h] and Great Ormond
      Street Hospital [i] and in other parts of the world [j].
      The charity Young Epilepsy report that: "Professor Scott's work on
        buccal midazolam has fundamentally changed practice in the management of
        status epilepticus. The research has led to the development of a new
        product that has not only proven to be an effective drug therapy for
        status epilepticus but also a more socially acceptable method of
        administration" [k]. Buccal midazolam has now clearly
      superseded rectal diazepam as the drug of choice for treating status
      epilepticus in the pre-hospital setting [l].
    Scott and colleague have worked with the charity Young Epilepsy to
      develop training programmes for professionals and schools on all aspects
      of epilepsy in children, including training packages for the
      administration of emergency medication.
    Benefits are not isolated to clinical metrics such as seizure termination
      rate, requirement for hospital or intensive care admission. Patients and
      their care-givers are afforded a higher quality of life through freedom of
      activity, retention of dignity and security in the knowledge that they may
      safely give/receive an effective treatment. The Scottish Medicines
      Consortium approved buccal midazolam in Scotland in 2012 and estimated
      that for the approximately 1,000 patients who will receive it annually
      there would be a cost saving on the drugs budget of &#163;100,000 per annum [m].
    
ImpactSummary

    As a direct result of work led by Professor Rod Scott and colleagues at
      the UCL Institute of Child Health (ICH) midazolam, administered by the
      buccal cavity, has become first-line therapy in the NICE pathway for
      treating children, young people and adults with prolonged or repeated
      generalised, convulsive seizures in the community. It also forms part of
      the APLS guidelines. Buccal midazolam has demonstrated clinical
      superiority over the previous paediatric standard of care (rectal
      diazepam) with an equivalent safety profile and greater patient/social
      acceptability. Its use is now widespread in Europe and the USA and a
      licensed preparation is now available.
    
UnderpinningResearch

    Convulsive status epilepticus (CSE), where epileptic seizures last at
      least 30 minutes, is the commonest neurological medical emergency in
      childhood and is associated with significant morbidity and mortality. For
      many years, a rectal preparation of diazepam was the most commonly
      recommended treatment for this condition, but this route was unacceptable
      to many parents and carers and was associated with treatment delay and
      avoidance, increasing the risk of intensive care admission for treatment
      of status epilepticus. As most seizures start in the community setting, a
      safe, effective and socially acceptable agent that can be administered by
      emergency medical technicians and parents/carers was required. We
      therefore developed buccal midazolam as an alternative to rectal
      diazepam
    Our initial studies (1996-9) evaluated the pharmacokinetics and
      pharmacodynamics of midazolam (midazolam maleate; a benzodiazepine)
      administered via the buccal route, using blood sample and
      electroencephalography (EEG)-based methods, and demonstrated both the
      drug's easy absorption and rapid effect on the brain [1]. Once we
      had determined the correct dose, we carried out a randomised controlled
      trial comparing buccal midazolam with rectally administered diazepam. In
      this study of 79 prolonged seizures in children with very severe epilepsy
      in a residential school setting, we showed that buccal midazolam was at
      least as effective as rectal diazepam, and was more socially acceptable [2].
      Subsequent trials in Europe and Africa have confirmed our findings, and
      have even demonstrated clinical superiority (seizure termination rate) to
      rectal diazepam in certain circumstances, along with significantly quicker
      administration and greater acceptability.
    Our research has subsequently moved to exploring the epidemiology of
      status epilepticus and whether status epilepticus can damage the brain. In
      2002 we established the North London Convulsive Status Epilepticus in
      Childhood Surveillance Study, in which we prospectively collected data on
      the management of CSE in the community. We demonstrated a low pre-hospital
      treatment rate (61%) for CSE, with termination of only 22% of episodes.
      For each minute of delay from CSE onset to arrival at Accident and
      Emergency, there was a 5% increased risk of seizures lasting &gt;60minutes
      with attendant risk of adverse outcomes and requirement of higher levels
      of care (intensive care) [3]. This work also confirmed that status
      epilepticus is common and that the range of causes differs in children
      when compared to adults [4].
    In other research, we have shown that status epilepticus leads to
      swelling of the hippocampus and that part of the brain subsequently fails
      to grow as expected during childhood [5]. We have also shown that
      status epilepticus is associated with learning difficulties and
      difficulties with memory [6]. As at least part of these
      difficulties result directly from the prolonged seizure, this work further
      demonstrates the need for treatments such as buccal midazolam.
    