CaseStudyId: 34811
Title: 
    Introduction of aromatase inhibitors for the treatment of breast cancer
    

ImpactDetails

    ATAC was the first trial to show that an aromatase inhibitor alone is
      more effective than tamoxifen for adjuvant treatment of early breast
      cancer, with fewer adverse effects. This has now been confirmed by
      subsequent studies [a, b, c]. ATAC has been the only trial to
      perform a direct head-to-head comparison of anastrozole against tamoxifen
      alone. The trial has the longest duration of follow-up, with benefits of
      anastrozole maintained out to at least 10 years. Anastrozole is now the
      most widely prescribed aromatase inhibitor worldwide, with more than twice
      as many prescriptions annually as the next most widely prescribed
      aromatase inhibitor. Over 5.5 million patient years of experience with
      anastrozole has now accrued, and global sales totalled $2.8bn for the
      period 2010-12, with the manufacturers citing the ATAC trial as the basis
      of this success [d].
    National and international guidelines now advocate use of an aromatase
      inhibitor as first-line adjuvant therapy instead of tamoxifen, based
      principally on the results of the ATAC trial. In 2005, a technology
      assessment from the American Society of Clinical Oncology on the use of
      aromatase inhibitors as adjuvant therapy for post-menopausal women with
      hormone receptor-positive early-stage breast cancer recommended that: "Based
        on results from multiple large randomized trials, adjuvant therapy for
        postmenopausal women with hormone receptor-positive breast cancer should
        include an aromatase inhibitor in order to lower the risk of tumor
        recurrence" [e]. The document refers to the ATAC trial
      throughout. The following year, a NICE technology assessment recommended
      that "The aromatase inhibitors anastrozole, exemestane and letrozole,
        within their licensed indications, are recommended as options for the
        adjuvant treatment of early oestrogen-receptor-positive invasive breast
        cancer in postmenopausal women" [f]. In March 2009, NICE
      Clinical Guideline 80 on `Early and locally advanced breast cancer'
      recommended that "Postmenopausal women with ER-positive early invasive
        breast cancer who are not considered to be low risk should be offered an
        aromatase inhibitor, either anastrozole or letrozole, as their initial
        adjuvant therapy" [g]. This was listed as a key priority.
    Anastrozole is now become standard treatment. A commentary on our 10-year
      analysis (ref [4] above) in the Lancet Oncology in 2010 stated that "Mainly
        on basis of the initial results of ATAC, aromatase inhibitor treatment
        has now been declared the standard adjuvant treatment of
        endocrine-responsive breast cancer by the St Gallen International Expert
        Consensus" [h].
    Anastrozole offers significant benefits to patients. While anastrozole
      and tamoxifen demonstrate similar outcomes in terms of overall survival,
      anastrozole increased absolute progression-free survival by 3%. Patients
      were also less likely to stop treatment because of treatment-related
      adverse effects. The following adverse effects were less common with
      anastrozole than with tamoxifen: hot flushes (5% absolute risk reduction),
      vaginal bleeding (5%) or discharge (9%), venous thrombosis (2%), stroke
      (1%) and endometrial cancer (0.4%) [i].
    Anastrozole has been estimated to lead to 0.26 QALYs gained per patient,
      with an incremental cost-effectiveness ratio of approximately &#163;12,600 per
      QALY gained and &#163;14,700 per life-year gained [j].
    
ImpactSummary

    The ATAC trial was conceived, designed and implemented by UCL
      investigators, and has resulted in a dramatic, global change in the
      management of breast cancer. It directly compared tamoxifen, the standard
      treatment for breast cancer for 25 years, with anastrozole, a
      novel aromatase inhibitor. It convincingly demonstrated superiority for
      the new agent, in terms of both progression-free survival and adverse
      effect profile. Tamoxifen had been the world's most widely prescribed
      anti-cancer drug but was supplanted by anastrozole as a consequence of
      this trial.
    
UnderpinningResearch

    Breast cancer is the most common form of cancer in the UK, with around
      50,000 new diagnoses annually, and the second most common cause of cancer
      death in women (approximately 12,000 deaths per year). Almost all newly
      diagnosed women will undergo hormone manipulation therapy to block the
      effects of endogenous oestrogen. Until the introduction of the aromatase
      inhibitors, the principal oestrogen antagonist was tamoxifen.
    The ATAC trial was based on the recognition that aromatase inhibitors, a
      novel class of breast cancer agents, had theoretical advantages over
      tamoxifen [1]. Tamoxifen was used after surgery for breast cancer,
      and known to reduce the risk of recurrent disease; it works via blockade
      of oestrogen receptors in breast tissue. The essential benefit of
      aromatase inhibitors is that they block all extra-ovarian post-menopausal
      production of oestrogens, the synthesis of which depends on metabolism of
      testosterone and androstenedione by the aromatase enzyme. This represented
      a fundamental approach to oestrogen deprivation, in contrast to tamoxifen
      which only blocked oestrogen uptake at the cellular level while
      leaving its production unchanged.
    At the time the ATAC trial was designed, there was considerable
      resistance to the concept of novel therapy using anastrozole alone, since
      tamoxifen was already so well established and indeed was the world's most
      widely prescribed anti-cancer drug. UCL investigators took the view that,
      although tamoxifen was an effective and relatively safe drug, it was not
      without hazards, some of which could be life-threatening. The ATAC trial
      was the first to offer a `head to head' comparison with tamoxifen, both
      alone (single agent) and in combination, and demonstrated that the newer
      agent was both more effective and less toxic [1-5].
    The ATAC trial recruited 6,241 patients, with long-term follow-up of
      approximately 24,000 woman-years [3, 4]. Anastrozole reduced the
      absolute risk of recurrence of breast cancer by 3% compared to tamoxifen,
      and treatment-related serious adverse events by 5%.
    