CaseStudyId: 34869
Title: 
    Trimethylaminuria is a genetic disorder
    

ImpactDetails

    The identification of the gene for FMO3 and the elucidation of TMAU as a
      genetic disorder have transformed our understanding of why some
      individuals have an extremely unpleasant `fishy' body odour. Prior to our
      1997 paper [4], which proved that TMAU is caused by mutations in
      the FMO3 gene, affected individuals were presumed to have poor
      hygiene. Individuals with TMAU can suffer social isolation, depression,
      rejection and higher than normal suicide rates. In some cases, because the
      odour is episodic, medical practitioners assumed the symptoms to be
      imaginary and resorted to psychiatric referral and prescription of
      antidepressants or antipsychotics. This creates an even worse outcome,
      because several of these drugs are substrates for FMO3, and the limited
      enzyme activity that the patient has is then occupied by drug
      detoxification.
    Impact on clinical practice
    Our work on TMAU has led to increased understanding by the medical
      profession of the genetic basis of the disorder of body odour. In 2007, at
      the invitation of the National Institutes of Health, USA (NIH), we
      produced a TMAU resource for the medical profession, which was updated in
      2011 [a]. The resource provides information on the disorder, its
      treatment and its diagnosis. A spokesman for the patient advocacy group,
      MEBO, states that "this is the resource which we recommend to everyone who
      wants information on TMAU" [b]. Shephard also contributed to the
      NHS Choices page on trimethylaminuria in 2013 [c].
    The identification of a genetic origin has enabled increased understanding
    of the condition by sufferers and those around them. For example, MEBO
    report that: "One Kenyan TMAU sufferer was being persecuted by neighbours
      and feared having to go to the police. She was able to send Dr Shephard's
      scientific TMAU paper to the management committee of her housing block to
      support her explanation of her condition" [d].
    Genetic testing
    Following our discovery that TMAU is due to mutations in the FMO3
      gene, private testing facilities began to offer a diagnostic test.
      Subsequently, the NHS added the test to their list of genetic tests, and
      testing is also available elsewhere in the world. Various companies have
      reported the numbers of patients tested as follows for the period 2008-13:
    
      Sheffield Diagnostic Genetics Service: 236 patients tested (since
        2007)
      Prevention Genetics, Wisconsin: 79 unique patients
      University of Colorado, Denver: 1-2 patients per month
      Mount Sinai Hospital, Toronto, Canada: 1 patient tested
      GENETAQ, Molecular Genetics Centre, Malaga, Spain: 13 families tested
        [e].
    
    Urine and genetic testing for TMAU are available on the NHS, but this is
      not the case in most countries, where patients must pay for costly tests.
      With the advent of cheaper DNA sequencing, some patients may elect to have
      their FMO3 gene sequenced. In collaboration with the patient group
      MEBO (see below), Shephard assists with the sequencing reads and
      explanation to patients [b]. In 2011 we published the European
      guidelines (Clinical Utility Gene Card) for genetic testing of TMAU [f].
      This provides guidelines for the medical profession and genetic testing
      industry.
    Work with patients and patient groups
    The unusual nature of TMAU has led to close links between researchers and
      patients developing in the course of the research described above, which
      continue today. In 2010, the patient advocacy group MEBO was founded, and
      Shephard has acted as scientific advisor to this group since 2011 [g].
      MEBO provides support and advice for those who suffer from TMAU with
      registered branches in the US, UK and Europe. It now has around 1,200
      members worldwide. In January 2012, Shephard assisted the organisation
      with a submission to fast-track TMAU for Social Security support in the US
      [h]. Later that year she was appointed to the Institutional Review
      Board (USA) for ethical assessment of a breath test device as part of a
      MEBO-initiated project. One member of the group has reported on the
      following positive impacts that Shephard's work has had on the community:
      "her approachability as a scientific advisor for MEBO Research; her
        educational articles which have helped our TMAU community
        internationally; her willingness to build bridges between the layperson
        sufferer and the biomedical scientist, and her support in empowering the
        TMAU community to take action to help itself" [i].
    Shephard has presented lectures and webinars on her research for MEBO to
      explain the science behind TMAU to those with the condition [i].
      She presented at the MEBO Research Body Odor and Halitosis meet-ups in
      Washington (April 2011) and Miami (June 2012) [j]. Shephard also
      posts on the MEBO website and assists with lay postings on the disorder on
      the organisation's blog. She has also helped patients to write articles
      about their experience, for example, one such article was published in the
      Daily Mirror and internationally. In 2012 she assisted another patient
      with an article for the Royal College of General Practitioners' InnovAiT
      journal [k].The disorder has been the subject of several TV
      programmes (e.g. BBC 2011, Food programme), radio (e.g. BBC World Service,
      March 2012 [l]) and the press. In each of these instances,
      Shephard has acted as advisor or interviewee. This coverage has had a huge
      `advertising' impact, helping to increase public awareness of the
      disorder.
    
ImpactSummary

    Research by Professor Elizabeth Shephard at the UCL Research Department
      of Structural and Molecular Biology has led to identification of the
      genetic origin of Trimethylaminuria (TMAU), commonly known as fish-odour
      syndrome. This has led to genetic diagnosis and genetic counselling for
      TMAU in the UK, Europe, USA and Canada, and the publication of guidelines
      for treatment and diagnosis. Shephard has engaged closely with patient
      groups over the years to publicise her findings. There is now an increased
      understanding among medical practitioners and the public that the body
      odour produced is due to a metabolic defect of genetic origin, and is not
      due to poor hygiene.
    
UnderpinningResearch

    Trimethylaminuria (TMAU) is a rare but distressing disorder in which
      sufferers excrete large amounts of trimethylamine (TMA) in the breath,
      urine and sweat, resulting in an unpleasant body odour similar to rotting
      fish, or, in some individuals, rotting garbage. The incidence is about 1
      in 40,000 and all ethnic groups are affected. The impacts reported here
      stem from basic molecular biology, biochemistry and molecular genetic
      research undertaken from the mid-1990s to the present at UCL, in
      collaboration with Ian Phillips, Queen Mary, University of London (now
      retired) and initially also with R. Smith (now retired), St. Mary's
      Hospital.
    It was known that TMA could be converted to its N-oxide by a
      flavin-containing monooxygenase in liver and that individuals responded
      differently to a trimethylamine challenge. Thus a genetic origin for TMAU
      was suspected. This research took place without the benefit of the rapid
      sequencing and genome resources available today. A systematic cDNA cloning
      strategy identified five different flavin-containing monooxygenase (FMO)
      mRNAs (FMOs 1, 2, 3, 4 and 5) and the five genes were mapped to the long
      arm of chromosome 1 [1]. Analysis of expression patterns in human
      tissue [2] identified FMO3 as the best candidate for the disorder.
      Using a then-novel method for exon determination, the gene structure for FMO3
      was determined [3]. Amplification and DNA sequencing of exons
      revealed a mutation in an affected individual that changed pro153 to
      leu153. The child was homozygous for the mutation and the parents were
      heterozygous for this mutation. The mutant protein was expressed from its
      cDNA and shown not to be able to convert TMA to TMA N-oxide.
    These results led, in 1997, to a paper in Nature Genetics reporting for
      the first time a genetic basis for TMAU [4]. This was accompanied
      by media coverage across the world and began the process of understanding
      of the genetic contribution to TMAU. Subsequently we, and others,
      identified additional mutations in the FMO3 gene that cause TMAU
      in different families. Over thirty mutations are now known to cause TMAU.
      Some cases proved to be caused by compound heterozygosity [5].
    In 2003 we created an online database of FMO3 mutations to inform
      researchers, patients and medical practitioners [6]. Since 2013
      the database, which is curated at UCL, has been hosted by the Leiden Open
      Variation Database (LOVD) Server, which permits researchers to submit new
      mutations and thus increases the resource for genetic testing services and
      patients who elect for testing. This is an ongoing project.
    In 2013 we were awarded funding under the MRC DFPS/DCS: MICA scheme for
      translational research to carry out a preclinical trial for a therapeutic
      we have devised, with industry, for TMAU. This preclinical trial project
      is in collaboration with an industrial partner.
    