CaseStudyId: 34903
Title: 
    Identification and cloning of the P2Y receptor class leads to new
      therapies targeting purinergic signalling
    

ImpactDetails

    1) Impact derived from the identification and cloning of the P2Y
        receptor class
    i. P2Y12 receptor: New antagonists to treat thrombosis
        and stroke
    Every year, arterial blood clots lead to approximately 90,000 heart
      attacks and 150,000 strokes in the UK. Historically, anticoagulants such
      as aspirin and warfarin are used to reduce the likelihood of blood
      clotting in high risk cases, but these drugs can have widespread unwanted
      side effects. Burnstock's characterisation of the P2Y receptor class made
      it possible to identify specific antagonists for the P2Y12
      receptor expressed on platelets. Two new drugs acting on this receptor,
      clopidogrel and its derivative ticagrelor, have been developed to prevent
      platelet aggregation. They are being used widely and successfully for the
      treatment and prevention of thrombosis and stroke.
    Clopidogrel (trade name Plavix, marketed by Bristol-Myers Squibb and
      Sanofi) [a] is indicated for the prevention of thrombotic events
      in patients suffering from symptomatic atherosclerosis, acute coronary
      syndromes, (including myocardial infarction with and without ST elevation
      and unstable angina), ischaemic stroke, or after placement of
      intracoronary stent or as an alternative antiplatelet drug for patients
      who are intolerant to aspirin. Plavix is marketed worldwide to nearly 110
      countries, with global sales of $7.09bn in 2011 [b].
    Ticagrelor (trade names Brilique, Possia and Brilinta, produced by
      AstraZeneca) [c], which acts faster than clopidogrel, is indicated
      for the prevention of thrombotic events (such as stroke or heart attack)
      in patients with acute coronary syndrome, or patients who have recently
      had an ischaemic stroke. Treatment of acute coronary syndrome with
      ticagrelor significantly reduces the rate of death from vascular causes,
      myocardial infarction or stroke. Brilinta is now included in seven sets of
      cardiovascular treatment guidelines by leading medical organisations
      across the world: two in Europe, four in the USA and one in Canada. It has
      been approved in 65 countries and its use is currently being reimbursed in
      21 of them. Brilinta is now on formulary at more than 80% of the top 400
      hospitals throughout the USA and its 2012 sales were $89m [d].
    ii. P2Y2 receptor: New agonists to treat dry eye
    Keratoconjunctivitis sicca, or dry eye syndrome, is a relatively common
      eye disease caused by either decreased tear production or increased tear
      film evaporation. Dry eye syndrome can be intensely uncomfortable and
      painful, with some patients going to the lengths of surgery to reduce the
      area available for tear evaporation. Burnstock's characterisation of the
      P2Y receptor class made it possible to identify specific agonists of the
      P2Y2 receptors, which evoke mucus secretion. A new such
      agonist, diquafasol (Diquas), has been developed by Inspire
      Pharmaceuticals (to whom Burnstock has been a consultant) [e].
      Diquas was launched by Santen in Japan in 2010, with Inspire
      Pharmaceuticals set to receive a milestone payment of $1.25m in the fourth
      quarter of 2010 [f].
    2) Impact derived from the identification and cloning of the P2X3
        receptor
    More than 270m people worldwide suffer from chronic pain, but there has
      been little recent success in advancing truly novel therapies for pain
      relief. Existing therapies, including opioids, antiepileptic drugs and
      non-steroidal anti-inflammatory drugs all have documented drawbacks.
      Through the cloning of the P2X3 ion channel receptor located on
      nociceptive sensory nerves and later the discovery of the involvement of
      these channels in signalling pain, Burnstock's work has uncovered a new
      target for pain relief, which is receiving attention from the
      pharmaceutical industry. Roche (with whom Burnstock was a Consultant and
      Research Collaborator with over &#163;2m support for over six years for this
      project) and, more recently, Afferent Pharmaceuticals (for whom he acts as
      a member of the Scientific Advisory Board), have developed AF-219, a
      specific P2X3 receptor antagonist, which is a promising new analgesic.
    AF-219 is currently in Phase 2 clinical trials for the treatment of three
      painful disorders: (a) osteoarthritis, which is the most common form of
      arthritis; (b) interstitial cystitis / bladder pain syndrome, which is
      experienced by 3-7% of women; and (c) idiopathic chronic cough, which
      accounts for up to 15% of coughs. Four Phase 1 studies of AF-219 have
      demonstrated that the compound is safe and well tolerated and completion
      of Phase 2 clinical trials is expected this year [g].
    Antagonism of P2X3 purinoceptors on primary afferent neurons is a novel
      analgesic approach that has been pursued by leading pharmaceutical
      companies for the last 15 years. Over 600 patents are currently held which
      relate to the P2X3 receptor and pain [h].
    3) Collaboration with clinicians and the pharmaceutical industry
    As a result of his research on ATP, Burnstock has had links with 35
      pharmaceutical companies, for whom he acted as a consultant or provided
      research support. He has collaborated with clinicians around the world on
      over 70 projects, including work on skin inflammation, motor neuron
      disease, diabetes, traumatic shock, liver and colorectal tumours, bladder
      incontinence, vitamin E deficiency, hypertension, and pancreatic, bladder
      and prostate cancer. Burnstock is currently the Senior Advisor for the
      Neuroallianz established by the German Government to link basic science,
      clinical science and the drug industry.
    
ImpactSummary

    Professor Geoffrey Burnstock and colleagues' establishment of the
      molecular structure of the P2Y class of receptor led to the cloning of
      several receptors within this class, which are increasingly seen as
      therapeutic targets for a variety of disorders. Indeed, drugs acting at
      these receptors are already improving patient health worldwide by reducing
      the risk of thrombotic events in people suffering from myocardial
      infarction or ischaemic stroke (via P2Y12 receptor antagonists)
      and by relieving the symptoms of dry eye disorder (via P2Y2
      receptor agonists). Burnstock and colleagues also cloned the P2X3 receptor
      which mediates pain information, and P2X3 antagonists are being developed
      as novel analgesics. As well as clear clinical benefits, these drug
      developments are associated with substantial economic and commercial
      benefits.
    
UnderpinningResearch

    Adenosine 5'-triphosphate (ATP) was originally considered to be
      exclusively an intracellular energy source, with no role in extracellular
      signalling. Against consensus opinion at that time, Burnstock (in UCL's
      Department of Anatomy, now Cell &amp; Developmental Biology) alone
      pioneered the notion that ATP and its derivatives can also act as
      extracellular messengers. Burnstock championed this idea through years of
      persistence, until, several decades of research later, we now know that
      such "purinergic" signalling occurs in many cell types throughout the
      body, including neurons, smooth muscle cells, epithelial cells,
      erythrocytes, immune cells and sperm. Purinergic signalling is now a vast
      and expanding field of biomedical research &#8212; over 5,000 articles are
      returned when PubMed is searched for "purinergic signaling".
    Burnstock was the first to define three distinct classes of purinergic
      receptor (for review, see [1]): P1 receptors (G protein-coupled
      receptors activated by adenosine), P2Y receptors (G protein- coupled
      receptors activated by several nucleotides including ATP and ADP), and P2X
      receptors (ATP-gated ion channels). Important roles for these receptor
      types have already been identified in development (from cell cycling to
      migration), normal physiology (from pain sensation to bladder
      contraction), and pathology (from arthritis to cancer).
    In 1993, Burnstock collaborated with Eric Barnard at the Royal Free
      Hospital and Trevor Smart at the School of Pharmacy (both now part of UCL)
      to clone the first P2Y G protein-coupled nucleotide receptor [2].
      This work established for the first time the molecular structure of this
      class of receptor and has led to the cloning of several receptors within
      this class. There are now eight recognised subtypes of P2Y receptors.
      Further work in the Burnstock lab identified roles for P2Y receptors in,
      among other things, human platelet shape change (P2Y12, [3])
      and mucus secretion (P2Y2, [4]). These discoveries were
      influential in the successful development of new drugs to prevent
      thrombotic events and to treat the symptoms of dry eye, respectively.
    There are seven recognised subtypes of the P2X receptor. In 1995,
      collaboration with John Wood at UCL led to the first cloning of the P2X3
      ion channel receptor located on nociceptive sensory nerves [5]. In
      1999, Burnstock proposed a purinergic hypothesis for pain in visceral
      organs, whereby ATP released from lining epithelial cells during
      distension acts on P2X3 receptors on subepithelial sensory nerve endings
      to send nociceptive messages to the brain [6]. Supporting
      evidence, including epithelial release of ATP, immuno-localization of P2X3
      receptors on subepithelial nerves, and activity recorded in sensory nerves
      during distension that is mimicked by ATP and reduced by P2X3 receptor
      antagonists, was later reported by Burnstock's lab in the bladder, ureter,
      and gut [7a-c]. In 2000, the lab demonstrated that pain-related
      behaviour is reduced in P2X3-deficient mice [8]. These
      observations have been influential in the development of novel selective
      analgesics.
    