CaseStudyId: 34929
Title: 
    Clinical Ethnography: Anthropological research influencing clinical
        practice in the US, Europe, Bhutan and Myanmar
    

ImpactDetails

    Research at UCL Anthropology has led to significant changes in how
      patients are treated and led
      to a culture change in psychiatry and clinical practice in Europe and the
      United States. Perhaps the
      greatest systemic change as a result of this research has been through
      contributions to the fourth
      edition of the Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of Mental Disorders, or
      the DSM-IV (American
      Psychiatric Association 1994). This is the hegemonic psychiatric
      diagnostic manual used daily by
      practitioners around the world, and which determines diagnosis and health
      insurance, particularly
      in the USA. Contributions to this manual have enhanced practitioners'
      understanding of the cultural
      dimensions of psychiatric disorder.
    Littlewood applied findings from his long and influential career of
      research on the cultural shaping
      of mental illness in the Caribbean and elsewhere (e.g. [a]) in his role as
      a consultant on the DSM-
      IV. This, and its 2000 revision the DSM-IV-TR, were used throughout the
      impact period until
      superseded by DSM-5 in May 2013. Specifically, Littlewood co-authored the
      appendix describing
      culture-bound psychiatric syndromes and the systematic evaluation of
      cultural context, which
      represents the first major recognition of anthropological findings on
      cultural diversity in an edition of
      the DSM (Cave 2002). This appendix was carried forward in both the
      DSM-IV-TR and the new
      DSM-5, thus demonstrating its ongoing use in psychiatric diagnosis [1].
    A 2005 study found that 26.2% of Americans qualify for a DSM-IV-TR
      diagnosis, a proportion
      unlikely to have changed during the impact period, which suggests the
      broad reach of this work [2].
      DSM diagnoses are used by American clinicians to request reimbursement
      from insurance
      companies and to monitor morbidity and mortality by national agencies.
      Thus, understanding
      culture-bound syndromes and relating them to the appropriate DSM diagnoses
      was essential to
      ensure patients were diagnosed and treated correctly, their physicians
      were paid, and these cases
      were incorporated into national statistics during the impact census period
      [3].
    The research has also been disseminated into clinical practice
        through training and the publication
        of key texts. For example, the findings from Calabrese's clinical
      ethnography at Harvard teaching
      hospitals [c] were published in a book that has influenced Swiss medical
      education. The book as a
      whole was the subject of a 2012 training symposium at the University
      Hospital of Basel, delivered
      by the editors and attended by approximately 100 Swiss clinicians, who
      discussed the book's
      findings and interacted with authors. The relevance of this symposium to
      clinical practice is
      demonstrated by the fact that attendees received continuing medical
      education credits [4].
      Similarly, Calabrese's monograph based on his Native American research [b]
      is used to train
      clinicians and medical researchers at Harvard Medical School [5].
    Clinical ethnography adds an important perspective to clinical practice
      which was previously
      missing. The impact of the work of Littlewood and Calabrese on the
      clinical disciplines is apparent
      in citations of their work in medical journals that clinicians must read
      to stay current in their fields
      and that typically do not cite anthropology. For example, [a] has been
      cited in the International
        Journal of Psychiatry in Clinical Practice (Mosotho, et al. 2008),
      the Journal of Marital and Family
        Therapy (Dow and Woolley 2011), and the Journal of Social Work
        Practice (Gray, et al. 2010), to
      name a few references in journals representing three separate clinical
      disciplines [6].
    The provision of robust psychiatric care is an essential aspect of
      delivering Bhutan's widely
      publicised efforts to define and improve Gross National Happiness (GNH).
      Yet a 2012 WHO report
      found there were only two psychiatrists serving the country's entire
      population of 672,000.[7] The
      mental health system is dramatically under-resourced and resistance to
      psychiatric care derives
      both from stigma and from traditional understandings of illness in terms
      of spirit possession, soul
      loss, or angry local deities, necessitating a culturally competent
      approach. Calabrese's action
      research has been instrumental in building a foundation for
        anthropologically-informed psychiatric
        services in Bhutan, and thus has contributed to the country's
      efforts to improve GNH.
    Applying insights from his research on culture and mental illness [b, c],
      Calabrese positively
      impacted psychiatric services in Bhutan through the delivery of
      anthropologically informed training
      on-site daily to over a dozen psychiatric staff members in Bhutan during
      three annual summer field
      trips in 2011, 2012 and 2013 and through ethnographic description of the
      lives of Bhutanese
      people with mental illness [d].
    A British Academy International Partnership Grant allowed Calabrese to
      bring Bhutan's Chief
      Psychiatrist and collaborator, Chencho Dorji, to UCL during April 2013 to
      meet British medical
      anthropologists and psychiatrists and learn about the latest developments
      in these fields. As a
      result, in April 2013, Calabrese signed a Memorandum of Academic
      Cooperation with the newly
      established University of Medical Sciences of Bhutan (UMSB) to develop
      curricula in Medical
      Anthropology/Clinical Ethnography and Mental Health for medical students
      and allied health
      professionals in Bhutan [8]. Training began in July 2013, with
      presentations delivered by Calabrese
      to approximately 30 staff of the new university, including the directors
      of constituent institutes such
      as the Royal Institute of Health Sciences. Calabrese was appointed
      Visiting Lecturer, not only to
      create programmes in Medical Anthropology, but also to help orient the
      university toward a more
      biopsychosocial and humanistic orientation generally. Calabrese is thus
      integrating these fields
      firmly into Bhutan's nascent system of medical education.
    An important aspect of Calabrese's work is direct public engagement and
      use of local media to
      inform the Bhutanese population about the nature of severe mental
      illnesses and what forms of
      treatment may help. Calabrese has been interviewed on Bhutanese radio, for
      example, an
      interview on 6 August 2012 on Radio Valley 99.9, the country's second
      private radio station which
      covers the capital Thimphu [9]. He was also interviewed by Bhutanese
      newspapers and has given
      public lectures at the National Referral Hospital and the Centre for
      Bhutan Studies to groups that
      included traditional and modern doctors and their students, hospital
      staff, and Bhutanese scholars.
      Calabrese has also networked with Bhutanese political and educational
      leaders around issues of
      mental illness.
    When it hit the impoverished coastal areas of Myanmar in 2008, Cyclone
      Nargis killed 150,000 and
      left up to one million homeless. Thanks to David Napier's research for his
      Lancet article (which,
      though published later, informed his Nargis work) and prior field research
      in Myanmar, he was
      contracted to create the first fully integrated qualitative-quantitative
      method for assessing
      vulnerability in a disaster rapid-assessment tool, and to train 18 Burmese
      to carry out work with the
      consent of the military dictatorship that had driven away most
      international NGOs at the time.
      Napier's assessment tool abandoned existing lengthy questionnaire
      schedules in favour of rapid
      identification techniques developed in earlier research and adapted to the
      fast-changing
      circumstances immediately after the cyclone.
    Drawing on his ongoing research on health effects of climatic events,
      Napier investigated the most
      efficient methods of rapid disaster assessment. The UN stated that fully
      integrated quantitative and
      qualitative vulnerability assessments had been attempted "but never in a
      disaster and post-disaster
      relief context due to the significant logistic and organisational
      requirements" (p. 96 in [10]). Napier's
      report to the UN and recommendations on the aftermath of Cyclone Nargis
      were based on a
      quantitative survey that involved over 13,000 people and a qualitative
      vulnerability study involving
      349 in-depth interviews with survivors, which focused on health and other
      risks. Napier focused on
      vulnerable women and children and was able to develop immediately
        responsive identifications of
        where assistance should be directed by the Tripartite Core Group
      (comprising the Government of
      Myanmar, ASEAN and the UN). The technique was subsequently adopted for
      demonstration to
      other aid workers and organisations seeking to enhance the efficiency of
      their own interventions at
      the UN conference on Cyclone Nargis held in Bangkok later that year. This
      novel disaster
      assessment technique has subsequently been trialed in a number of
      settings.
    
ImpactSummary

    Clinical ethnography research at UCL has made significant contributions
      to clinical practice and
      diagnosis internationally. In Europe and the USA, this has been through
      the provision of teaching
      resources and diagnostic tools, such as the inclusion of culture-bound
      syndromes in the Diagnostic
      and Statistical Manual of Mental Disorders (DSM). In Bhutan, research was
      instrumental in
      improving the country's nascent psychiatric health services and directing
      them towards an
      appreciation of local contexts whilst applying Western medical practices.
      In Myanmar, research led
      to the development of an important vulnerability assessment tool following
      Cyclone Nargis, which
      was used to develop immediately responsive identifications of where
      assistance should be
      directed.
    
UnderpinningResearch

    Clinical Ethnography, as pioneered at UCL, is a methodology that involves
      immersive ethnographic
      study of illness and clinical practices, which is then used to inform
      improved clinical practice,
      impacting and transforming patients' experiences. Clinical Ethnography
      deploys ethnography not
      simply as an anthropological method in pursuit of anthropological data but
      with the additional
      intent, and result, of improving clinical outcomes. This interdisciplinary
      approach thus bridges
      anthropology and health sciences, reaching beyond the clinic to create
      socially contextualised
      clinical understanding.
    Roland Littlewood (Professor of Anthropology since 1994) established the
      foundations of Clinical
      Ethnography through a number of key research projects which have
      sensitised numerous clinical
      practitioners to questions of cultural specificity. Internationally
      recognised for his research on the
      relationship between colonialism, racism and psychiatric theory, his
      findings have illuminated the
      social shaping of illness and diagnosis[a].
    Joseph Calabrese (Teaching Fellow at UCL 2008-2009; Lecturer since 2011)
      has used his dual
      training in anthropology and clinical psychology in research projects with
      Native Americans, at
      Harvard teaching hospitals, and in Bhutan to explore the relationship
      between culture and mental
      health. Calabrese (2013) described a postcolonial healing movement which
      was threatened with
      criminalisation for its ritual use of the psychoactive peyote cactus [b].
      He documented healing
      experiences and reports by clinicians that this healing ritual was more
      effective against alcoholism
      than standard psychological approaches. While initial fieldwork for this
      project was conducted
      before joining UCL, the analysis, research synthesis and actual drafting
      was completed at UCL.
      Calabrese's research on Harvard teaching hospitals revealed that cultural
      differences between
      clinicians and patients were not as significant a barrier to care as the
      mismatch between patients'
      need for a traditional doctor/patient relationship and the realities of
      the impersonal, bureaucratic
      culture of modern medical care [c]. This fieldwork took place in 2008,
      with data analysis carried out
      whilst at UCL. Subsequent research in Bhutan, beginning 2011, investigates
      local understandings
      of mental illness and treatment by embedding as a local clinician, which
      allows deep participant
      observation of clinical cases and local practice. Findings illuminate the
      lives of Bhutanese
      psychiatric patients, the effectiveness of modern psychiatric treatments
      in this context, and the role
      of ritual healing for less severe illnesses [d].
    Based on his field research in Myanmar, and on then-ongoing research for
      the Lancet Commission
      (later published as [e]), David Napier (Professor at UCL since 2007)
      pioneered new ethnographic
      methods of disaster assessment in the aftermath of Cyclone Nargis in 2008.
      He demonstrated that
      qualitative and quantitative data could be fully integrated in a disaster
      setting, tying individual case
      studies to large data sets that direct the flow of aid resources both
      immediately following a natural
      disaster, and during periods of reconstruction [f]. Subsequently, as the
      member with expertise in
      culture and health of a 2009 UCL Lancet commission on "Managing the Health
      Effects of Climate
      Change", he and his team produced a list of recommendations on (1) disease
      and mortality; (2)
      food; (3) water and sanitation; (4) shelter and human settlements; (5)
      extreme events; and (6)
      population and migration [e].
    