CaseStudyId: 34955
Title: 
    The neurobiological basis of fetal awareness &#8212; impact upon recommended
      obstetric practice.
    

ImpactDetails

    Elective abortion is a matter of considerable political, social and
      ethical concern. The UK has one of the most liberal laws in the world,
      based upon scientific and clinical rationale and a strong sense of a
      woman's right to choose, rather than upon religious beliefs. After the
      introduction of The Abortion Act 1967, the Act of the United Kingdom
      Parliament legalising abortions by registered practitioners, and
      regulating the free provision of such medical practices through the
      National Health Service (NHS), the UK Government has regularly reviewed
      scientific evidence related to this Act.
    As a direct result of her published research, Fitzgerald was asked to
      give evidence at a House of Commons Science and Technology Committee on
      the scientific evidence relating to the Abortion Act of 1967 [a].
      This and other evidence from different sources led to the UK Government
      retaining the 24-week limit on abortion in the UK in 2007 [b].
      This decision inevitably led to controversy, due to strong reactions from
      pro-life religious groups, many of whom are of the opinion that fetuses
      feel pain, are sentient and should not be terminated at any stage. The
      Minister of State for Health therefore commissioned the Royal College of
      Obstetrics and Gynaecology (RCOG) to review the scientific and clinical
      evidence for fetal awareness in detail and to update their original 1997
      report on this subject (to which Fitzgerald had contributed) [c].
      As a direct result of her published research on fetal nervous system
      development, and specifically the development of pain pathways, Fitzgerald
      was invited to join the working party and was a co-author of the updated,
      2010 published report, entitled `Fetal Awareness. Review of Research and
      Recommendations for Practice' [d].
    The intention of the report was to review the relevant science and
      clinical practice relevant to the issue of fetal awareness and, in
      particular, evidence published since 1997. In so doing, the report was
      completely rewritten to take account not only of recent literature but
      also of the evidence presented to the House of Commons Committee. The
      report concluded that, since most neuroscientists believe that the cortex
      is necessary for pain perception, it can be concluded that the fetus
      cannot experience pain in any sense prior to 24 weeks gestation. After 24
      weeks there is continuing development and elaboration of intracortical
      networks such that noxious stimuli in newborn preterm infants produce
      cortical responses. Such connections to the cortex are necessary for pain
      experience but not sufficient, as experience of external stimuli requires
      consciousness. Furthermore, there is increasing evidence that the fetus
      never experiences a state of true wakefulness in utero and is kept, by the
      presence of its chemical environment, in a state of continuous sleep-like
      unconsciousness or sedation. This state can suppress higher cortical
      activation in the presence of intrusive external stimuli. The implications
      of these scientific observations for clinical practice are such that the
      need for analgesia prior to intrauterine intervention, for diagnostic or
      therapeutic reasons, becomes much less compelling. Indeed, in the light of
      current evidence, the Working Party concluded that the use of analgesia
      provided no clear benefit to the fetus. Furthermore, because of possible
      risks and difficulties in administration, fetal analgesia should not be
      employed where the only consideration is concern about fetal awareness or
      pain [e].
    The number of women affected by this report is very high: in 2010, there
      were 189,574 abortions in England and Wales; in 2011 there were 196,082;
      in 2012 there were 185,122 [f]. Furthermore the impact spreads
      beyond the termination procedure itself to the long term physical and
      mental health of affected women. The RCOG's updated guidelines were
      followed by the Academy of Medical Royal Colleges' publication `Induced
      abortion and mental health: a systematic review of the mental health
      impact of induced abortion' [g]. The purpose of the review was to
      examine the evidence of the impact of abortion upon women's mental health.
      The Academy's conclusions echoed the RCOG's guidelines.
    This report has set the clinical and scientific standards for medical and
      allied health professions on the termination of pregnancy, and provided
      scientific underpinning for the current UK abortion law. It received
      considerable press attention with reaction from both pro-choice and
      pro-life groups [h] and the interest of medical ethicists [i].
    
ImpactSummary

    Research by Maria Fitzgerald's group in the Department of Neuroscience,
      Physiology &amp; Pharmacology has provided fundamental biological
      knowledge of the development of pain pathways in the human fetus that is
      recognised all over the world. As a direct result of her published
      research, she co-authored a report from the Royal College of Obstetrics
      and Gynaecology on clinical recommendations for practice in fetal medicine
      and fetal termination. Published in March 2010, this report provides
      authoritative, evidence-based recommendations for medical practitioners,
      abortion advisory groups and patients, and consequently determines
      clinical practice throughout the UK. The recommendations impact upon a
      large number of women; in 2011 there were 196,082 abortions in England and
      Wales.
    
UnderpinningResearch

    The research underpinning this case report stems from Fitzgerald's
      studies of fetal and neonatal pain pathways which mapped the growth of
      nociceptive afferent terminals into the skin and into the central nervous
      system (CNS) before birth [1]. These data demonstrated that, while
      peripheral nociceptors develop prenatally, their central connections and
      thus their ability to transmit nociceptive information to the brain do not
      develop until just before birth [2].
    Subsequent research by Fitzgerald, on how pain pathways develop over the
      perinatal period, has elucidated the development of central signalling
      pathways, inhibitory circuits and descending brainstem control in the
      maturation of pain processing in early life [e.g. 2,3].
    At the same time, Fitzgerald has also pioneered the study of the
      neurobiology of infant human pain processing. In the human, the extremely
      premature infant is the closest model we have to the third trimester human
      fetus. Her early work in this area demonstrated that premature infants
      from 24 weeks gestational age (GA) can process nociceptive stimuli at
      spinal and brainstem level, but in a different way from older children and
      adults [4]. The research is notable for its use of quantitative
      neurophysiological techniques, grounded in basic neurobiology, to study
      CNS pain processing in very young preterm infants. This continues to the
      present day, using cot-side techniques such as near-infra red spectroscopy
      and electroencephalography (EEG) for direct brain measurement of pain
      processing in extremely preterm infants [5].
    Fitzgerald's work has clarified the difference between the onset of
      nociceptive reflex behaviour observed in fetal life, which requires intact
      circuits in the spinal cord and brainstem only, and the onset of pain
      `awareness' or `experience' which requires functional cortical
      connections. This is fundamental to the understanding of fetal pain.
      Recent work shows a transition in the premature infant brain response
      following tactile and noxious stimulation from nonspecific, evenly
      dispersed neuronal bursts to modality-specific, localised, evoked
      potentials between 24 weeks GA and term. The results suggest that specific
      neural circuits necessary for discrimination between touch and nociception
      emerge from 35-37 weeks gestation in the human brain [5].
    