CaseStudyId: 34970
Title: 
    Pain relief for hospitalised infants
    

ImpactDetails

    In the UK, eight per cent of all live births are preterm and many of
      these infants will spend time in a special neonatal hospital unit
      receiving medical care. This care necessarily involves repeated invasive
      procedures, a median of ten painful procedures per hospitalised day.
      Despite this, pain in this patient group is undertreated and there is an
      acknowledged need to formulate a scientifically sound, evidence-based, and
      clinically useful framework for the management of anaesthesia and
      analgesia in neonates. A major challenge in analgesic trials in the infant
      population is the definition of a reliable, quantitative outcome
      measurement of pain. The most commonly used measures are based on
      behavioural and physiological observations, or composite pain measurement
      instruments, such as the premature infant pain profile (PIPP), based on
      these observations. These methods are unlikely to be an appropriate
      outcome measure for neonatal analgesic trials because they are largely
      based on human observation and judgment and take no account of the
      developmental changes in infant motor behaviour.
    The discovery by Fitzgerald and colleagues that single heel lances
      (required for clinical care) in hospitalised infants evoke specific
      nociceptive brain activity (recorded with neonatal electroencephalography,
      EEG) and spinal nociceptive reflexes (recorded with electromyography, EMG)
      meant that these responses could be used as the first quantitative neural
      measure of pain processing in this vulnerable patient group. For the first
      time, a randomised controlled analgesic trial in newborn infants was
      undertaken, using specific nociceptive brain activity as a direct measure
      of infant pain. The results showed that oral sucrose, a commonly used
      `analgesic' for procedural pain in infants does not significantly affect
      activity in neonatal brain or spinal cord nociceptive circuits, and
      therefore is unlikely to be an effective analgesic drug. The ability of
      sucrose to reduce clinical observational scores after noxious events in
      newborn infants should not be interpreted as pain relief [a].
    This trial, listed on the UK trials gateway [b], showed that
      current analgesic methods in use in neonatal care units around the UK and
      elsewhere are inadequate and a more rational basis of care is required in
      the future for this vulnerable patient group.
    As is common for big impact clinical papers, the Lancet invited
      commentaries on the results of this trial [c] and a reply to these
      was also published [d]. Importantly the trial received a very
      positive review on NHS Choices [e].
    Evidence that the trial has changed views and practice
      Professor Chris Kennard, Chair of the MRC's Neuroscience and Mental Health
      funding board said: "This trial has significant implications for
      healthcare policy and is a first class example of where MRC research is
      helping bring scientific discoveries from laboratory bench to patient
      bedside more quickly. With uncertainty around the role that pain plays in
      a baby's neurodevelopment, this research is a vital tool for informing
      healthcare decision makers" [f].
    Dr Judith Meek, consultant neonatologist at UCLH has discussed changes in
      practice in the neonatal unit at UCLH as a result of this study [g].
      Other recent publications, emphasising problems with sucrose, following on
      from this sucrose trial have now been published [h]. It was also
      reviewed on the Faculty of 1000 website [i], discussed in Nature
      Medicine [j] and reported in the public press and on numerous
      medical sites in the UK and the USA [k].
    Increasing public awareness of science. In 2011, Fitzgerald
      contributed to the BBC Horizon programme The Secret World of Pain
      which went out to 1.96m viewers [l]. A review in the Guardian
      said: "The film's greatest pleasure was that each painful story was
      narrated without exploitativeness aforethought, but with the aim of
      teaching us some science." This programme, and Fitzgerald's work,
      were discussed widely in the press and online, including on blogs and
      patient forums, showing how the work has increased public awareness of
      this area of research [m].
    
ImpactSummary

    Eight per cent of all live births in the UK are preterm. Many of these
      infants spend time in special care, receiving an average of ten painful
      procedures per day of hospitalisation. Analgesics are administered to
      infants on an ad hoc basis and evidence of their efficacy has relied upon
      observations of behaviour and indirect physiologic responses. Fitzgerald
      and Slater at UCL have pioneered neurophysiological measurement of pain
      activity in the human infant brain, based upon Fitzgerald's developmental
      pain research. Using this measure, they have carried out the first ever
      randomised clinical trial of neonatal analgesic efficacy using a
      quantitative neural outcome.
    
UnderpinningResearch

    The Fitzgerald lab at the UCL Research Department of Neuroscience,
      Physiology and Pharmacology has been recognised for many years as a world
      leader in the neurobiology of infant and childhood pain. Fitzgerald's
      research into the developmental neurophysiology of neural pathways and
      circuits that process pain is carried out in animal models and in human
      subjects. The first studies on human infants focussed upon the measurement
      of spinal nociceptive reflexes (using electromyography (EMG) recording
      from flexor muscles of the lower limb), and the sensitisation of these
      reflexes to repeated skin-breaking procedures and surgery [1,2].
      Later studies focussed upon activity in the brain, using near-infrared
      spectroscopy (NIRS) [3,4] and electroencephalography (EEG) [5,6]
      to measure cortical activation in response to time-locked, clinically
      required heel lances used to draw blood for clinical monitoring.
    Fitzgerald and colleagues discovered that even the youngest infant
      displayed a measurable brain activation following a tissue-damaging
      noxious stimulus, as shown by cortical haemodynamic responses [3,4]
      and specific evoked nociceptive potentials [5,6]. Importantly,
      while there is some correlation between these direct brain measures and
      the currently used clinical observation tools, it is clear that not all
      infants are able to display pain facial expressions or physiological
      responses and that the recorded neural activity in the brain was in many
      cases a more reliable measure of pain activity [4]. The size of
      the evoked potentials increases with gestational age, and premature
      infants who have undergone repeated noxious stimuli in intensive care have
      larger evoked nociceptive potentials than their age-matched counterparts
      who were born full term [6]. This confirmed basic laboratory
      studies which had shown that repeated noxious stimulation in infancy can
      lead to prolonged sensitisation of nociceptive circuits and increased
      pain.
    Improving the treatment of pain in infants requires analgesic trials in
      the infant population with reliable, quantitative outcome measures of
      pain. The discovery that single heel lances evoke specific nociceptive
      brain activity recorded with neonatal electroencephalography (EEG) and
      spinal nociceptive reflexes recorded with electromyography led Fitzgerald
      and colleagues to use this specific nociceptive brain activity as a direct
      measure of infant pain in a randomised controlled trial of analgesia.
    