CaseStudyId: 34998
Title: 
    Providing the philosophical underpinnings for self-directed support in
        social care
    

ImpactDetails

    Wolff's research on alternative approaches to injustice helped provide
      the intellectual framework for pioneering work on self-directed support in
      social care by a national charity, In Control. A collaboration between
      Wolff and Simon Duffy, then Chief Executive of In Control, began in 2002
      when Duffy, who had been experimenting with personal budgets for adults
      with intellectual disabilities, attended a seminar at the University of
      Sheffield, given by Wolff on the subject of disability. In subsequent
      discussions, the two realised that Wolff's conceptual framework could
      support Duffy's practical work, and this conjunction of Wolff and Duffy's
      respective skills as a theoretician and a policy maker resulted in the
      expansion of self-directed support and its adoption by the UK government.
      Since 2008, the two major impacts of this have been:
    
      Shaping government policy at both a national and local level.
      Improving the health and quality of life of disabled citizens and
        their carers by improving service delivery.
    
    Self-directed support enables people eligible for social care to make
      decisions regarding their care using a personal budget allocated to them.
      This enables individuals to direct resources where they are most needed
      and thus take control of their own care, and reduces the burden on social
      workers and others working in social care. As a result, in 2012-13 alone,
      over 600,000 people with intellectual and physical disabilities, including
      many older people and people with mental health problems have been able to
      direct their own care through personal budgets [10].
    The idea of personal budgets had been treated with suspicion in some
      political circles, in the belief that it was a revival of a `voucher'
      system designed simply to save money, and would undermine collective
      facilities such as day centres. Wolff's research provided a way to justify
      personal budgets by emphasising the positive benefits of developing the
      autonomy of disabled people who previously had little control over their
      own lives, as well improving the efficiency of government spending. Those
      receiving personal budgets could choose to spend money on collective
      goods, as many did when the collective goods were of a decent standard.
      Having the choice meant that individuals can design their own care package
      which would typically also have other elements. Duffy renamed Wolff's
      concept of `targeted resource enhancement' `Conditional Resource
      Entitlement' (CRE) and used it as the basis for the development of an
      innovative and workable concept of adult social care [see for example 2].
      CRE provides a way to explain the nature of an individual budget as a
      resource under the control of the person to whom it is delivered, but
      subject to some conditionality or rules. According to Duffy, Wolff's
      research paved the way for expansion of In Control's work by setting out a
      conceptual framework that helped strengthen the intellectual foundations
      of the work, clarified and framed the central questions it needed to
      address and to explore novel ways of differentiating and conceiving policy
      choices. This is acknowledged, for example, in the introduction to a 2010
      article, where Duffy states: "This article builds on initial analysis
      first presented to the English Department of Health in 2007 via Waters and
      Duffy's report for In Control on Individual budget integration. As
      acknowledged in this initial report and in the current article, much of In
      Control's initial thinking in this area has been influenced by the work of
      Jonathan Wolff on disadvantage, inequality and different forms of redress
      (see, for example, Wolff, 1998, 2002, 2003)" [3, p. 506. Wolff 2003 is
      [a], above]. Duffy's adoption of Wolff's approach enabled him to present
      its advantages in seminars and meetings with local and national government
      officials, such as to the Cabinet Office in 2004, in a concise and
      rigorous fashion that made it appealing to local and national agencies
      alike [9].
    Wolff continued to be involved in In Control's later, larger experiments,
      connecting disability service provision with the `capability approach' in
      political philosophy and stressing the importance of evaluating the
      service to ensure that the burden of care was not simply transferred to
      others in the community or family, such as mothers.
    Self-directed support has since formed a key part of the personalisation
      movement, which seeks to increase choice and control for adult users of
      social services. This has influenced several national government policies.
      In 2006, after successfully testing self-directed support model, the
      Department of Health commissioned an In Control report on individual
      budgets. That report, to which Wolff was a contributor, appeals to
      conditional resource entitlement and draws `heavily from the recent work
      of Jonathan Wolff on disadvantage, inequality and different forms of
      redress' [1, p. 58]. It formed one of the bases of the development of the
      Putting People First ministerial concordat, signed by 6 cabinet ministers
      in December 2007, implemented from 2008, and adopted as a national
      strategy from 2009 to 2011 [4]. Putting People First explicitly recognised
      In Control as the pioneer of personal budgets. It has, in turn, catalysed
      and informed over a hundred local government policies directly affecting
      service provision, and influenced further government policy and programmes
      such as Think Local Act Personal (January 2011), the cross-sectoral
      partnership that succeeded Putting People First and which is based on
      `self-directed support' [7]. In Control's influence among policy-makers
      across the UK continues to grow and can also be seen in the newly
      implemented Social Care (Self-Directed Support) (Scotland) Act 2013.
    By leading to improved social care service delivery, Wolff and Duffy's
      collaboration has improved the health and quality of life both of citizens
      who receive self-directed support, and of their carers. By March 2011 all
      councils in England had implemented Putting People First [6], to the
      benefit of at least 338,000 service users: in this context alone, the
      research informed the deployment of more than &#163;1.5 billion of government
      allocations in support of personal budgets [7, p. 3]. Specific examples of
      local councils are Barnsley and West Berkshire, both of whom implemented
      Putting People First from 2008 [6]. In 2012-13, "the number of people
      receiving self-directed support was 609,000 (an increase of 16% from
      2011-12). Of these, 151,000 received a direct payment &#8212; up 8% from
      2011-12. The number of carers receiving self-directed support was 100,000
      (an increase of 28% from 2011-12)" [10, p. 5]. Evaluations of the service
      found those receiving personal budgets were significantly more likely to
      feel in control of their daily lives, the support they accessed and how it
      was delivered [8]. This confirms Wolff's hypothesis that `targeted
      resource enhancement' can improve an individual's autonomy, independently
      of any other effects on well-being. And as Wolff also argued, such
      policies are likely to have further positive effects on the well-being
      both of the individual who receives the budget and his or her carers. Even
      when other factors were accounted for, personal budgets were also found to
      be associated with statistically significant positive effects on carers'
      quality of life and social care outcomes, without increasing public
      expenditure [8]. Use of personal health budgets was further found to be
      associated with a significant improvement in care-related quality of life
      and psychological wellbeing [8].
    The principal direct impact of Wolff's collaboration with In Control is,
      of course, its effect on the more than 600,000 people who were in receipt
      of self-directed support by 2012-13. However it is also important to note
      that it has only been able to achieve this scale of influence through two
      other types of impact. One is its impact on national government policy [4]
      [5], which was essential for the programme to be implemented at scale. The
      other is the way in which the programmes have been embedded in local
      action [6] both prior and subsequent to its adoption as a national
      programme. Putting People First was itself unique in establishing a
      collaboration between central and local Government, the sector's
      professional leadership, providers and the regulator; In Control's role in
      pilot programmes &#8212; supported by Wolff's research &#8212; also represented a new
      partnership between government and the third sector.
    
ImpactSummary

    Research by Jonathan Wolff provided the intellectual framework for
      pioneering work on self-directed support in social care by In Control, a
      national charity whose mission is `to create a fairer society where
      everyone needing additional support has the right, responsibility and
      freedom to control that support'. Wolff's work with In Control has shaped
      recent government policies including the Putting People First strategy
      (adopted 2008), which have improved health provision generally and service
      provision for disabled persons in particular. The specific impacts
      described here are (1) shaping government policy at both a national and
      local level and (2) improving the health and quality of life of more than
      600,000 disabled citizens and their carers by improving service delivery.
    
UnderpinningResearch

    Within many liberal egalitarian approaches to political philosophy, a
      standard approach to remedying disadvantage is to recommend economic
      redistribution in the form of `tax and transfer' policies. Jonathan Wolff
      (joined UCL as Lecturer in 1986; Professor of Philosophy since 2000)
      became dissatisfied with this approach on the grounds that, first, it
      assumes that all goods are commensurable and their lack can be remedied
      with cash, and second, that it ignores the social structures that can
      profoundly influence our well-being. Wolff began exploring alternative
      approaches in the early 1990s and, in a project starting in 1997, Wolff
      turned his attention to the question of how a society of equals should
      treat issues of disability. He has since presented his findings on
      disability in the UK, Europe, the USA and Africa.
    In developing his own approach, Wolff suggested that the transfer of
      resources is not always the best way to overcome disadvantage in cases of
      disability. Transferring resources to a disabled person, in virtue of
      their disability, appears to convey the message that they are to be
      compensated for an inherent defect that makes them less able than others
      in some relevant respect. This initially led Wolff to focus on a social
      model of disability, in which the disadvantages faced by disabled people
      are remedied by altering the social environment to allow them to function
      more successfully within it. In 1999, Wolff wrote a paper integrating the
      social model of disability into contemporary theories of equality.
      Although this paper was widely circulated and later used in a 2002 USA
      National Endowment for the Humanities summer school on disability, it was
      never published in its original form because Wolff continued to develop
      his thinking in more detail and came to question whether the social model
      of disability was capable of covering all cases, especially those of
      intellectual disability. Following discussions with disability activists
      around 2001 and consideration of new experimental policies (especially
      those of Simon Duffy, see section 4), Wolff concluded that in some cases
      transferring money to disabled people is the most defensible
      strategy after all. Even though changes to the physical, legal or cultural
      environment will almost always be highly beneficial for people with
      disabilities, such changes will not always be enough to remedy their
      disadvantages. Consequently Wolff modified his view, allowing that tax and
      transfer has a role alongside other approaches. That modified view &#8212; which
      is of central importance to the impacts described here &#8212; was first
      sketched out [a] and then more fully developed [b, c] in a series of
      publications between 2002 and 2013, which first of all showed how the
      social model of disability could be used to develop a new account of
      `addressing disadvantage' more broadly in political philosophy, and then
      went on to show that nevertheless it needed to be supplemented by other
      forms of redress in the case of disability. Wolff drew on his experience
      with In Control (as described in section 4), to present the joint work to
      a philosophical audience [d], which was the first time he had explicitly
      applied his framework to cognitive disability in detail. The work was
      further developed in the context of a wide-ranging analysis of
      disadvantage in a joint study with Avner de-Shalit (Hebrew University,
      Jerusalem) in 2007 [e]. A further version was included as a chapter of
      Wolff's solely authored book on ethics and public policy in 2011. [f]
    At the centre of this research is Wolff's distinction between two
      different rationales for providing money to people with disabilities:
      `pure compensation', in which alternative goods are provided to make up
      for the miseries or lack of `internal resources' of disabled people, and
      what Wolff called `targeted resource enhancement' (later renamed
      `Conditional Resource Entitlement' &#8212; see section 4), in which people are
      provided with the means to buy goods and services so that they can achieve
      a flourishing life in their own way. Wolff remains critical of pure
      compensation policies, but argues that the disadvantages faced by a
      disabled person can sometimes be best addressed by providing her with
      money, not on the grounds that she is to be compensated for an inherent
      defect, but rather that society should provide her with the means to
      flourish in her own way. This has every chance of advancing not only the
      individual's well-being, but also his or her autonomy, which, especially
      for younger people with cognitive disabilities, has often been ignored or
      overlooked.
    