CaseStudyId: 35202
Title: 
    Changes to health policy and medical device regulation following
        analysis of metal-on-metal hip replacements
    

ImpactDetails

    The research described above has directly affected UK and US health
      policy, industry, clinical practice and patient health.
    Changes to international health policy: The identification
      that a level of 7 parts per billion (ppb) was an important cut-off in the
      blood levels of metal ions between poor and well functioning hips [4] has
      informed clinical guidance disseminated around the world and is currently
      used to monitor all MOM patients across the UK. In 2010, the finding was
      adopted by the UK health regulator, the MHRA, and incorporated into their
      guidance on the clinical management of patients with MOM hips as the
      "action level" above which they recommend further intervention. These
      guidelines, which were the first in the world to specify how to monitor
      and treat patients with MOM hips, were disseminated globally in 2010. The
      "action level" has remained unchanged as of late 2013, and is used to
      monitor 90,000 patients with MOM hips in the UK [a]. John Skinner chaired
      the MHRA's expert advisory panel looking at soft tissue reactions
      associated with MOM hip replacements. The panel's report was disseminated
      among patients, GPs and surgeons as well as industry and healthcare
      providers. [b] NICE (the National Institute for Health and Care
      Excellence) updated its recommendations for hip replacement surgery in
      October 2013, issuing stricter guidelines that rule out the use of most
      types of MOM implant in the UK.
    The research has also indirectly resulted in a change in the regulation
      of all metal-on-metal hip devices in the United States and United Kingdom.
      In the US, the problems with MOM hips, including that identified by the
      research above, led to a technology overview undertaken by the American
      Academy of Orthopaedic Surgeons (AAOS) in 2011 [c]. This led to an FDA
      order, in January 2013, requiring manufacturers of MOM total hip
      replacement systems to submit premarket approval applications, citing
      reports including the MHRA expert advisory panel report [d]. In the United
      Kingdom, the MHRA and British Orthopaedic Association have gone further in
      setting up the "Beyond Compliance" initiative in May 2013. This initiative
      is intended to improve the rigour of CE marking processes before an
      implant is sold, and to provide high-quality surveillance and a
      decision-making process to identify failures at the earliest point and
      suggest appropriate action. [e]
    Development of new and revised clinical guidance in the UK and abroad:
      International health regulatory agencies and professional bodies
      (including the FDA and Australian Therapeutic Goods Assocation [f],
      American Association of Orthopaedic Surgeons [g], British Hip Society,
      Arthritis Research UK) have used the research described above to create
      their own recommendations for the 1.5 million patients worldwide that have
      MOM hips. In particular, the research team's long-running analysis of the
      mechanism of hip failure has been widely welcomed by, and influential
      among, surgeons. Regulatory bodies including the FDA have produced advice
      for surgeons based on the research, particularly the investigations (metal
      ion testing and soft tissue imaging) first identified in output [3] [h].
      According to Dr J Jacobs, president of the American Academy of Orthopaedic
      Surgeons, output [1], above "is an important contribution to our
      understanding of the performance of the current generation of large
      femoral head metal-on-metal devices." He added: "it is informative for the
      surgeon regarding component positioning." [i]
    Changes to clinical practice and subsequent cost savings:
      The sensitivity and specificity analysis of blood metal ions and the MARS
      MRI interpretation enabled the MHRA to create clinically usable clinical
      management guidelines, as shown by their adoption across the NHS [j]. As a
      result, blood metal ion testing and MARS MRI, which were unavailable in
      all NHS hospitals in 2006, are now routinely available, and have
      revolutionised the management of patients with metal-producing hips, most
      of which are metal-on-metal but now also include those with junctions
      between two different types of metal. The MARS MRI protocols have
      supported more effective clinical management, by reducing either
      unnecessary revision procedures or delays to revision procedures to
      prevent irreversible muscle damage. The reduction in unnecessary revision
      procedures alone produces very significant NHS cost savings, since each
      surgery costs more than &#163;10,000. Reducing delays to revision procedures
      likewise supports the reduction of productivity losses, not just for the
      NHS and the UK economy more broadly, but also for individual patients.
    Subsequent impacts on patient health and wellbeing: A
      crucial result of the work has been to improve the quality of life of
      patients suffering from painful hip replacements. Patients who experience
      an adverse reaction to a MOM hip now have them replaced with a
      ceramic-on-ceramic or ceramic-on-polyethlyene implant and the level of
      metal ions in the patient's blood slowly falls; after 50 days, the levels
      are reduced by half [k]. Moreover, by identifying some of the factors that
      can predict if a patient will have problems with a MOM hip, such as hip
      size, and the patient's age and sex, the research has led to a reduction
      in the number of patients receiving these hips and thus being at risk of
      complications. The National Joint Registry (NJR) monitors all joint
      replacement operations in the UK. Their latest report notes that MOM
      stemmed hip replacement and hip resurfacing have virtually ceased, with
      fewer than one in one thousand hip replacements performed in 2012 being of
      this type [l], having peaked in the UK in 2008 at around 8,000 operations.
      The research received widespread media coverage, helping alert patients to
      potential problems and symptoms; coverage included features on Newsnight,
      the BBC website and in national newspapers including the Daily Telegraph,
      Daily Mail and Guardian [m].
    Accountability within industry: The LIRC is the first truly
      global (22 countries, all continents) retrieval programme for medical
      implants: removing 4,700 components from 2,300 patients since 2008.
      Industry, patients and surgeons regularly approach the researchers to
      provide independent reports. In August 2010, Johnson &amp; Johnson
      subsidiary DePuy issued a global recall for two of its hip replacements
      after NJR data showed higher than expected revision rates. [text removed
      for publication]. In May 2013, Johnson &amp; Johnson announced it was
      phasing out production of all its MOM hips [o].
    Evidence from the research has been used to support patient claims
      against the manufacturers of these faulty implants, including one claim
      leading to an $8 million pay out to a patient with the DePuy implant. A
      number of other manufacturers have also recalled hips. Johnson &amp;
      Johnson have allocated more than $1 billion, and other health providers
      many more billions of dollars, to pay for earlier-than-expected redo hip
      operations [p]. The recent work on the taper connection [7] is informing
      manufacturers about the best designs to use, and guiding their implant
      testing and assessment [q].
    Increased public awareness: Charities, regulatory agencies
      and professional bodies have used the research to create information
        resources for the public and patients. For example, Arthritis
      Research UK's online clinical advice [r], based on the research, is viewed
      more than 1,000 a month [s]. ARUK's web statistics show that users stay on
      the page for approximately five times longer than the site average,
      demonstrating that people are engaging with the content [s].
    
ImpactSummary

    UCL research into metal-on-metal (MOM) hip replacements has developed
      evidence affecting the 1.5 million patients with MOM hips worldwide and
      led, indirectly, to a change in the regulation of all medical devices by
      the US Food and Drug Administration and the UK Medicines and Healthcare
      Products Regulatory Agency (MHRA). Direct impacts include stimulation of
      the first global retrieval programme for medical implants, [text removed
      for publication], and the development of a change in the MHRA protocol
      used to monitor all UK MOM hip patients. These have led to improvements in
      the quality of patients' lives after redo surgery, and supported
      litigation cases worth billions of dollars against health providers &#8212;
      including Johnson &amp; Johnson &#8212; to fund compensation and
      earlier-than-expected redo hip operations. Public awareness of issues with
      MOM hips has been stimulated through widespread media coverage and
      creation of information resources by charities and regulatory bodies.
    
UnderpinningResearch

    In 2004 orthopaedic surgeons John Skinner and Alister Hart used
      inductively coupled plasma mass spectrometry (ICP-MS) to demonstrate that
      some of their patients with metal-on-metal (MOM) hip implants released
      detectable levels of cobalt and chromium in the blood and that this
      affected circulating immune cells. In 2007, using high-resolution x-ray
      analysis at the then newly opened Diamond Light Source synchrotron
      facility, they were able to show for the first time that the corrosion
      products in human tissue surrounding MOM hips were chromium (III)
      phosphate rather than any chromium (VI) cancer-causing species, solving a
      30-year debate over the chemical speciation of metal debris from hip
      replacements [5]. The latest finding from their synchrotron work in 2012
      showed that cobalt is the likely culprit for the adverse tissue response,
      even though the predominant metal left behind in the tissues is chromium.
    In 2006, Skinner and Hart had noted that unexplained pain in a group of
      patients with MOM hips had required revision surgery to remove and replace
      the original implants. This type of surgery can be very challenging
      because of the tissues destroyed by the inflammatory reaction to the
      cobalt and chromium previously released from the hips. To better
      understand the mechanism of failure of MOM hip replacements, they devised
      a programme of international inter-disciplinary research to untangle the
      complicated relationship between three dimensional (3D) surgical
      positioning, implant design and patient factors in the performance of hip
      implants. Implant retrieval analyses provide important insights into the in
        situ performance of orthopaedic devices and provide critical clues
      into mechanisms of failure and success. In 2008, they therefore created a
      consortium of nine orthopaedic manufacturers (all of whom signed a
      research contract with no restrictions on publication) to fund their
      foundation of the London Implant Retrieval Centre (LIRC), set up to
      collect and analyse failed (retrieved) implants from around the world.
      Since then, they have analysed 1,000 hips, using sophisticated metrology
      (coordinate measurement and roundness machines) to measure the small
      amounts of volumetric loss that lead to metal nanoparticle release and
      consequently, to the presence in the blood of metal ions that cause
      inflammation of tissues and destruction of muscle, and ultimately require
      revision of hips [1]. Their use of 3D CT with metal artefact reduction to
      quantify the effect of surgical positioning on blood metal ion levels, led
      to their publication of the first study to quantify the effect of all
      angles of orientation of the cup component [4]. This work was conducted in
      collaboration with medical statistician Dr Fabiana Gordon at Imperial
      College. In 2009, the researchers returned to their previous use of ICP-MS
      to assess the diagnostic test characteristics of blood metal ions for
      predicting failure. This work, with two groups of patients (well and poor
      functioning) found a 90% specificity for detecting failure when using a
      cut-off level of 7 parts per billion. [3]
    Since 2011, the research has focused on an examination of microscopic
      wear and corrosion at the tapered junction between head and stem parts of
      MOM implants [7]. Electrochemical static and dynamic corrosion tests
      performed under loaded and non-loaded conditions found that surface area
      and surface finish are important factors in wear and corrosion at
      interfaces in modular MoM hips. This indicates that the design of the
      taper junction connecting the head to the stem of the implant can lead to
      increased metal release. [6]
    In 2011, Skinner and Hart worked with MRI physicist Dr Donald McRobbie at
      Imperial Healthcare NHS Trust to develop new metal artefact reduction
      sequence (MARS) MRI protocols that alter the radiofrequency fields to
      minimise heating and metal artefact around hip implants [2]. The
      application in patients of these protocols, which won the 2010
      Radiological Society of North America Education Exhibit Prize, enabled
      them to more easily detect soft tissue inflammation and muscle damage
      adjacent to metal implants [2]. Further work with material science
      collaborators enabled very sophisticated nano-scale imaging to take a
      "snapshot" of the corrosion of the metal debris inside cells. This showed
      both the physical (size, shape and density) and chemical (ionic state /
      valency) form of the metal debris &#8212; the first report of this technique
      applied to human tissue. [7]
    Research conducted between 2008 and 2010 found that, in 50% of patients
      with implant failures, the levels of material loss were in fact low. This
      research was the first to emphasise the significance of unexplained
      patient factors, rather than implant design and surgical positioning, in
      the failure of MOM hip implants. These patient factors remain the focus of
      Skinner and Hart's current research.
    The research was conducted in collaboration between UCL and Imperial
      College London. Alister Hart is currently Professor of Orthopaedic surgery
      at UCL. The research began in 2004, when he was a clinical lecturer at
      UCL. Between 2006 and 2012 he was at Imperial College. John Skinner has
      been a clinical senior lecturer at UCL Institute of Orthopaedics, at the
      affiliated Royal National Orthopaedic Hospital since 2000. In 2012, Hart
      returned to UCL and since then the research has been solely conducted at
      UCL.
    