CaseStudyId: 35206
Title: 
    Human-centred security in government and commercial applications
    

ImpactDetails

    The concepts developed by Professor Sasse through the research described
      above have transformed the delivery of effective security by UK government
      and industry. By informing improvements in the design of security systems
      used by millions of people each day, Sasse's work has helped make systems
      easier to use while reducing the risk of security breaches in service
      provision. Her work has also led to widespread commercial benefits, with
      the production of improved security products and greater organisational
      efficiency stemming from more usable and cost-effective systems. As of
      2013, the human-centred approach to security is now seen by government and
      industry as standard and essential, and forms the cornerstone of security
      practices in many large and small corporations globally.
    Adoption of new technology in public services: Technology allows
      for virtually all government services to be made available online in a
      secure and effective way with simple, user-friendly ways for citizens to
      assert their identity. This access needs to be consistent across
      government services whilst being highly secure and able to preserve users'
      privacy. Between 2008 and 2011, Professor Sasse advised the government on
      e-government security. Specifically, she was heavily involved in defining
      and implementing the federated identity solution developed by the Cabinet
      Office Identity Assurance Programme to ensure a low-cost, low-effort and
      privacy-respecting way for authenticating UK citizens. In June 2013 the
      government confirmed this would be the "default service for all government
      departments providing public digital services which require identity
      assurance" [a]. This will enable the government to provide online more of
      its services, for example universal credit, accessing benefits and
      pensions, passport and driving licence renewal and many more. The system
      started alpha trials in May 2013, with eight federated identity service
      providers including the Post Office, Experian and PayPal, involving
      thousands of service users; a statement from the Cabinet Office confirms
      its plans that this form of authentication will be used by the majority of
      the UK's 45 million adult population [b].
    New online security products: Between 2008 and 2011 Sasse also
      worked with several SMEs to deliver usable authentication products such as
      GridSure and PINplus [c]. Most notably, her work with First Cyber Security
      led to a redesign of their anti-phishing tool SOLID. One of the biggest
      difficulties with anti-phishing software is users' failure to notice
      indicators from the software while on web pages. Sasse's work enabled the
      company to identify which software design elements to adapt to increase
      users' intuitiveness and perceived speed, alongside a review of the human
      interaction with the software [d]. The improvements have led to a huge
      expansion of the customer base for the tool, which is now used by over
      1,000 online retail sites. Sasse's guidance on minimising user effort and
      giving them value inspired the company to create a new integrated product:
      the Safe Shop Window, which provides shopping search results that filter
      out suspicious sites, saving users time as they no longer need to evaluate
      each site individually. This launched in 2012 and now protects the
      customers of sites that generate 70% of the UK online retail turnover [e,
      f].
    Sasse is currently Chief Scientific Advisor of iProov, a security startup
      company that delivers her concept of "0 Effort, 1 Step, 2 Factor"
      authentication, described above. The company provides an off-the-shelf
      biometric authentication service for companies, so they do not have to
      invest in costly and inefficient in-house services. Sasse's work improved
      the biometric by improving the usability of feedback given to users.
      Launched in 2011, iProov now employs four full time staff and has recently
      won two TSB grants, for which the CEO confirms Sasse's engagement made a
      "material difference". iProov is already bidding for major commercial
      contracts in the financial, telecommunications and call centre industries.
      [g]
    Adoption of new processes in businesses: During the Trust
      Economics project (2008-2011, funded with &#163;1 million by UK TSB) Sasse
      collaborated with HP Labs to include models of human behaviour in security
      models and tools [h]. Building on this work, since 2011 HP has exported
      Sasse's user-centred approach in their consultancy to other companies
      through its Security Analytics service [i]. This calculates the cost to a
      business of using particular security approaches. It draws on Sasse's
      expertise in calculating how much employee time is spent dealing with a
      given mechanism. This enables HP, and by extension its clients, to work
      out the costs of this silent waste of productivity, thereby informing the
      decisions an organisation makes about security. For example, in 2011 one
      of HP's clients was the University of Nottingham, which was able to
      identify which areas of its security system did and did not require
      further investment [j].
    
ImpactSummary

    Professor Sasse created, developed and delivered the user-centric
      perspective that now underpins security thinking in both corporate and
      public-sector domains. This perspective shaped the UK government's
      Identity Assurance Programme (IDAP), a federated identity solution that
      will provide access to all e-government services in the UK. HP has
      incorporated the compliance budget model into its Security Analytics
      product, which enables companies to calculate the impact of a given
      security mechanism on individual and corporate productivity. Sasse's work
      also underpins new and improved security products, including First Cyber
      Security's SOLID and Safe Shop Window tools, which protects over 70% of UK
      online shopping revenue; GrIDSure's one-time PIN system (now part of the
      SafeNet Authentication Service); and iProov's authentication service.
    
UnderpinningResearch

    The human-centred approach &#8212; which prioritises the design of usable
      security that works with and for, rather than against, users and their
      organisations &#8212; was first formulated by Professor Sasse (Professor of
      Human-Centred Technology; at UCL since 1990) in 1999 in her groundbreaking
      CACM paper: "Users are not the enemy"; it has been cited over 800 times
      and is recognised as one of the founding papers of Usable Security [1]. It
      unpicked how security policies and mechanisms that are too difficult to
      use lead to productivity losses, non-compliance and errors, and a negative
      security culture. Security policies and mechanisms implemented without
      considering the users thus consume considerable organisational resources,
      but do not deliver effective security. When BT hired Sasse to conduct the
      study, forgotten passwords consumed huge help desk resources, at
      ever-increasing cost to the company. The paper led to the introduction of
      single sign-on solutions, less complex password content, and longer
      password expiry periods.
    In 2008, she developed the compliance budget concept, which
      explains how friction between information security and business process
      reduces both security compliance and personal and organisational
      productivity [2]. An analysis of users' security burden in economic terms
      showed that security measures need to be seen in context with all the
      other demands on a user's time and attention. The user's ability to comply
      &#8212; the "compliance budget" &#8212; is limited and needs to be managed like any
      other finite corporate resource. Collaborating with HP Labs in Bristol
      from 2008 to 2012, she integrated user behaviour into economics and system
      modelling research in order to integrate the Compliance Budget into a
      large-scale organisational model allowing predictions of the cost and
      effectiveness of security policies and mechanisms [3]. Rather than
      focusing on theoretical risk mitigation that can be achieved through the
      introduction of security mechanisms, UCL's research suggested policies
      should be designed using human-computer interaction (HCI) principles to
      make it easier for users to `do the right thing' when it comes to
      security.
    In most organisations, IT security managers decided on security policies
      and mechanisms without considering the impact on individual and corporate
      productivity. The work presented a new approach that incorporates the
      impact of security controls on users' productivity and willingness to
      comply into business impact and risk reduction [4]. As part of this,
      Professor Sasse pioneered the use of quantitative and qualitative data
      collection and analysis methods (system logs, user diaries and surveys
      based on security dilemmas) to obtain evidence of the impact and
      effectiveness of security measures [5].
    These methods were used in a project commissioned by the US National
      Institute of Standards and Technology (NIST) to collect evidence for the
      productivity losses caused by the `wall of disruption' created by outdated
      explicit authentication mechanisms, and to make the economic case for the
      introduction of implicit authentication mechanisms &#8212; for which Sasse
      coined the term "0 effort, 1 step, 2 factor" authentication. She also
      pioneered the use of web-based authentication field trials to monitor the
      long-term authentication performance of novel mechanisms, and ways of
      influencing users to pick `less obvious', yet memorable choices [6].
    In 2012 she extended the compliance budget concept into the more
      ambitious concept of productive security: security measures not
      only reduce specific risks, but provide additional value to other aspects
      of the business process, such as quality enhancement, more fine-grained
      customer feedback and personalisation. Productive security is a structured
      decision-making framework into which company data can be inserted,
      alongside the key `missing link' measurements of employee's workload, risk
      perception, and resulting security behaviours. This helps companies
      understand the total cost of ownership of security measures, thereby
      choosing security mechanisms that improve other aspects of the business
      process leading to an overall increase of productivity of the
      organisation. Mechanisms that involve, rather than antagonise, individuals
      are an essential part of a more flexible capability to defend against as
      yet unknown security threats, against which engaged and watchful staff
      provide the `last line of defence'. The research to demonstrate the impact
      of this idea is funded by GCHQ and EPSRC as part of the Research Institute
      in Science of Cyber Security (of which Sasse is Director) and conducted in
        situ with three major UK companies and one public sector
      organisation (identities not revealed for contractual reasons).
    Researchers working in Professor Sasse's team were: Adam Beautement (RA
      since 2012), Sacha Brostoff (RA at UCL 2006-2007 and 2009-2012), Philip
      Inglesant (RA at UCL 2008-2011), and Simon Parkin (involved 2008-2012
      while working at Newcastle and HP, joined UCL as Senior RA 2012).
    