CaseStudyId: 35387
Title: 
    The Moorfields Safer Surgery System: new techniques revolutionise
      glaucoma surgery.
    

ImpactDetails

    Glaucoma affects 70 million people worldwide, of whom seven million are
      blind. It is the
      commonest cause of irreversible blindness in the world, and the commonest
      neuropathy in the
      world. There are no well-established figures for the number of glaucoma
      surgeries which are
      carried out globally. However, based on relatively conservative figures it
      is likely that more than 2%
      of glaucoma sufferers will require surgery during their lifetime &#8212; that is
      around 1.4m individuals.
      Our work has improved treatments &#8212; both pharmacological and surgical &#8212; for
      these patients,
      enabling the surgery to be used more widely and with greater success.
    1) Intraoperative application of 5-FU
    The use of 5-Fluorouracil (5-FU) to modify the wound healing in glaucoma
      surgery was first
      investigated in the early 1980s, with the treatment initially consisting
      of a series of post-operative
      injections. Our work established that a single intra-operative application
      of 5-FU can be used with
      the same effect. The benefits to patients are a reduction in the number of
      visits, and reduction in
      discomfort or pain from the injections. There is also a reduced cost,
      which has enabled the
      treatment to be extended widely, particularly in developing countries. A
      recent Cochrane review
      (2009 update) stated that "Clinicians now appear to prefer the
        intra-operative application of agents
        for the modification of wound healing and routine postoperative
        injections of 5-FU are now rarely
        used" [a].
    Our work is referenced extensively in the European Glaucoma Society's
      guidelines on use of 5-FU
      in glaucoma surgery, which recommend a five-minute sponge exposure for
      intra-operative use [b].
      Intra-operative use of 5-FU is also recommended in Asia-Pacific glaucoma
      guidelines, which also
      specifically reference our work with regard to mode of application and
      surgical techniques [c].
    2) Improved surgical techniques
    Glaucoma surgery has in the past had significant complications, including
      soft eye with bleeding
      and visual loss, and late infections from thin areas of fluid drainage
      associated with the surgery.
      Previously, virtually all of these complications would increase with the
      use of anticancer agents.
      The principles learnt from our earlier cell culture and in vivo
      experiments enabled us to establish
      how these agents worked as local applications and thus develop the
      Moorfields Safer Surgery
      System. This consists of several simple changes to surgical techniques,
      and the development of
      improved components which dramatically reduced the incidence of
      potentially blinding
      complications. The incidence of infection of the drainage area due to
      thinning varies from 6% to
      20% in three- to five-year follow up. This is reduced to approximately 0.5
      - 1% with the wide area
      anticancer treatment technique in the Moorfields system [d].
    A review of clinical practice in 2011 stated that: "While
        complications are a risk, modern glaucoma
        surgery techniques as developed by Khaw and colleagues have greatly
        reduced the risk of both
        intra- and postoperative complications" [e].
    One of the main benefits to the Moorfields Safer Surgery system is that
      the techniques described
      are relatively inexpensive and can be accessed by most surgeons around the
      world including those
      from the poorer countries. This has enabled the system to spread widely,
      and it is now the
      standard technique used around the globe [f].
    We have distributed information about this techniques free online [g],
      and the system has reached
      all continents. Khaw has given many invited lectures in the USA, South
      America, Africa, India,
      South East Asia and Australia to highly receptive audiences, who have in
      turn spread the
      Moorfields Safe Surgery system. One surgeon from the All India Institute
      of Medical Sciences, who
      was trained in our techniques in 2005, now reports that "Currently all
        residents and fellows that
        pass from our university are trained in the Moorfields Safe Surgery
        System... This system is now
        being adopted across all major ophthalmic centres in our country and
        also in south east Asia. The
        Moorfields Safe Surgery system has significantly impacted both general
        ophthalmologists and
        glaucoma specialists, improved the standard of care and also the quality
        of life of glaucoma
        patients across India" [h].
    In addition, Khaw has worked with a UK commercial company, Duckworth
      &amp; Kent, to develop a
      comprehensive set of instruments which can be used in line with the Safer
      Surgery System [i].
    The complications of trabeculectomy surgery have improved considerably
      since the UK national
      survey of trabeculectomy 15 years ago. Early complications occurred in
      46.6% and late
      complications in 42.3%. With the Safer Surgery System and 5-FU there were
      no cases of
      endophthalmitis, hypotonous maculopathy, retinal detachment or blindness.
      Studies around the
      world have found similar improved outcomes using our protocols which is of
      direct relevance to
      many hundreds of thousands of individuals across the world [j].
    
ImpactSummary

    Glaucoma is the commonest cause of irreversible blindness world-wide and,
      in many parts of the
      world, surgery to create a new drainage channel is the only practical
      treatment. The commonest
      cause of surgical failure is scarring, and the use of injections of
      cytotoxic agents prevents scarring
      but has many complications. Our research identified how convenient single
      5-minute treatments
      with cytotoxic drugs work and led us to carry out pilot and randomised
      trials, which showed they
      reduced post-operative scarring. Combined with other refinements of
      surgical technique (named
      the Moorfields Safer Surgery System) this has improved outcomes of
      glaucoma surgery world-wide.
    
UnderpinningResearch

    Glaucoma affects approximately 70 million people world-wide, of whom 7
      million are blind. A key
      risk factor for the development and progression of glaucoma is increased
      intraocular pressure. A
      surgical approach to this problem is to create a drainage pathway for
      fluid to escape which in turn
      lowers intraocular pressure. The most important cause of failure of these
      so-called filtration surgery
      procedures is scarring of the drainage pathway under the conjunctiva, the
      thin membrane that
      covers the white of the eye.
    Research in the early 1990s at the UCL Institute of Ophthalmology
      developed in vivo cell culture
      models of the ocular wound healing process. This led to the discovery that
      very short (five minute)
      applications of anticancer agents including 5-fluorouracil (5-FU) and
      mitomycin-c (MMC) had long
      lasting effects on ocular fibroblasts that were responsible for scarring
      after surgery [1]. A series of
      intracellular protective events including the expression of p53 were
      associated with the cells going
      into long term cell growth arrest but not death. At that time
      5-fluorouracil was given clinically, as a
      series of 14 painful injections around the eye in the first two weeks
      after surgery. Our experiments
      suggested that an equivalent effect could be achieved with a single
      inexpensive five-minute
      painless exposure at the time of surgery. We then developed a much more
      consistent and
      predictable model of glaucoma surgery in the rabbit and used this to
      establish that a single
      administration of 5-FU was equivalent to seven injections in terms of
      accumulation of scar tissue
      and cellularity and functioning of the drainage area. We also carried out
      a series of experiments
      which clarified the principles of focal, titratable long term inhibition
      of scarring in the subconjunctival
      area [2].
    We then carried out the world's first pilot human trials with five minute
      exposures to 5-FU which
      strongly suggested that this treatment (which costs just &#163;1) is
      efficacious [3]. We undertook further
      randomised trials with colleagues in in Africa [4] and Asia [5]
      which showed that 5-FU was
      effective in reducing scarring after glaucoma filtration surgery.
    The principles of how to use of anticancer agents including the
      associated surgical technique were
      further developed, based on our early studies and clinical observation,
      into the Moorfields Safer
      Surgery System. These principles of which are now used around the
        world to make surgery
        much safer than in the past [6].
    