CaseStudyId: 35393
Title: 
The development of pyrrolobenzodiazepine dimers as cancer therapeutics


ImpactDetails

Work on PBDs has been commercialised over the last 13 years through spin-out company
Spirogen, which was set up in 2000 with Hartley as one of the founding scientists [a]. Initial funding
came from the Bloomsbury Bioseed Fund, and laboratories were established at the UCL Cancer
Institute and UCL School of Pharmacy. As at July 2013, the company has a broad intellectual
property base with &gt;40 published patents and patent filings covering the use of PBDs as stand-
alone anticancer drugs and as targeted agents. The company is currently based at the Queen
Mary BioEnterprise Innovation Centre, London and has 25 employees [b].
Between 2001 and 2003, the company went through two rounds of funding, and SG2000 was
licensed to Ipsen. This drug successfully completed Phase I Clinical Trials in the UK and US, and
results were reported in 2008 [c]. 69 Patients were treated in multiple phase I trials, with 15 cases
of stable disease and three partial responses of note [d].
In October 2009, Spirogen regained development and commercialisation rights for SG2000 from
Ipsen, and entered into an option agreement with Celtic Therapeutics to fund the Phase IIa trials of
SG2000 in ovarian cancer, with investment of up to $15m [e]. Phase II trials began in 2010 [f],
evaluating the overall response rate of SG2000 in approximately 50 patients with recurrent,
resistant or refractory epithelial ovarian, primary peritoneal, or fallopian tube carcinoma.
More recently, significant further inward investment has been obtained by Spirogen with multiple
collaborations with pharmaceutical companies in the area of PBD drug conjugates. In particular,
the PBDs are beginning to have an impact in the area of antibody drug conjugates, which is fast
emerging as one of the principal approaches in the field of monoclonal antibody cancer
therapeutics:
January 2011: Announced a research collaboration and license agreement with Genentech, a
member of the Roche Group, for the discovery and development of antibody drug conjugates
involving Spirogen's proprietary PBD drugs and associated linker technology [g].
March 2012: Celtic Therapeutics formed a new company, ADC Therapeutics, headquartered from
Lausanne, Switzerland with a pipeline of ten proprietary ADC oncology development programs,
targeting multiple major cancers, including prostate, renal, breast, lung and blood cancers and an
initial budget of $50million.2028Celtic Therapeutics is also the majority owner of Spirogen, and ADC
Therapeutics' development plan for the ADCs will use well-characterized monoclonal antibodies
against these ten antigens for conjugation with best-in-class warhead and linker chemistry based
on proprietary pyrrolobenzodiazepines ("PBDs") "payload" technology developed by, and licensed
from Spirogen. Stephen Evans-Freke, Co-Founder and Managing General Partner of Celtic
Therapeutics commented in the press release: "We believe that ADCs will represent a significant
medical breakthrough in cancer therapy over the coming decade, and that Spirogen's PBDs
constitute `best-in-class' ADC warheads. We anticipate investment of up to $50m into ADC
Therapeutics to achieve clinical proof of concept in 2-3 lead oncology programs. We are committed
to fully fund ADC Therapeutics and will raise additional capital if warranted" [h].
April 2012: Began a collaboration with a School of Pharmacy spin-out company, PolyTherics1, to
use their ThioBridge technology to conjugate Spirogen's potent PBD cytotoxic agents site-
specifically to antibodies and antibody fragments [i].
February 2013: Began a research collaboration with Ablynx to evaluate the potential of a novel
anti-cancer drug conjugate combining Spirogen's proprietary cytotoxic drugs,
pyrrolobenzodiazepines (PBD), and associated linker technology, with Nanobodies&#174; generated
using Ablynx's proprietary technology platform [j].
[text removed for publication].
In late 2013 Spirogen was acquired by Astra-Zeneca for a total of $440million ($200million upfront
plus $240million deferred consideration on meeting defined developmental goals/milestones) [k].

ImpactSummary

Research at the UCL Cancer Institute into drug-DNA interactions has led to spin-out company
Spirogen Ltd resulting in job creation (currently 25 employees) and significant investment from
within the UK and overseas. Pyrrolobenzodiazepine dimer drug (SJG-136, SG2000) is currently in
clinical trials in the USA and collaborative research and licence agreements in the area of antibody
drug conjugates have been established with large pharmaceutical partners including in 2011 with
Genentech, a member of the Roche group. In 2013, Spirogen was acquired by Astra-Zeneca for
$200m.

UnderpinningResearch

Joint research between Professor John Hartley (UCL, 1988-date) and David Thurston (UCL School
of Pharmacy, 2001-11; now Kings College London) led to the rational design, synthesis and
evaluation of novel pyrrolobenzodiazepine (PBD) dimers as potent anticancer agents. These drugs
bind sequence-selectively in the minor groove of DNA, forming non-distorting DNA interstrand
cross-links which are refractory to repair [1, 2]. In collaboration with the US National Cancer
Institute (NCI), lead molecule SJG-136 (SG2000) was found to exhibit potent, differential
cytotoxicity in vitro, have a novel mechanism of action through COMPARE analysis, and broad
spectrum antitumour activity in vivo.
This drug has been evaluated in four Phase I clinical trials in the UK (UCL) through Cancer
Research UK (CRUK) and in the USA through the NCI. It has completed a Phase II trial in platinum
refractory ovarian cancer, and a haematological Phase I/II is currently open. The clinical trials have
been facilitated through use of novel pharmacodynamics endpoints of DNA cross-linking and
damage response developed at UCL [3, 4].
As part of detailed structure activity relationship studies we found that the potency of PBD dimers
can be enhanced by introducing unsaturation about the C2-position of the PBD C-ring and
installing substituents that are directed along the floor of the DNA minor groove. The next
generation of PBD dimers, which are more potent than SG2000, have been developed, including
SG2057 and SG2202. They exhibit picomolar/sub-picomolar activity against a range of human
tumour cell lines and demonstrate curative activity in human tumour xenograft models. SG2285, a
prodrug of SG2202 is currently in pre-clinical development [5, 6].
The ability to generate such cytotoxic molecules that display exquisite potency suggested a
potential role in strategies aimed at targeting and releasing highly cytotoxic agents directly at a
tumour site. An example is as the `warhead' component of an antibody drug conjugate (ADC). The
fully synthetic PBD dimers are ideally suited for the role of warhead in an ADC approach. They
combine potency with a demonstrated therapeutic index (unlike other warheads such as
calicheamycin), are not cross-resistant with widely used chemotherapy agents, and their unique
mode of action sets them apart from the tubulin binders (maytansinoids and auristatins) that
currently dominate the ADC arena. Several PBD dimer-containing ADCs, targeting both
haematological malignancies and solid tumours, are currently undergoing preclinical and clinical
evaluation.
