CaseStudyId: 35395
Title: 
    Prevention and treatment of childhood obesity
    

ImpactDetails

    Our research has influenced policies and initiatives to improve nutrition
      in children, tackling childhood obesity, and improving the long-term
      health of the population. Our work has benefited children from birth
      onwards, covering breast feeding, production and use of infant formulas,
      and novel public health programmes for children of different ages. Our
      growth acceleration hypothesis and the results of our randomised
      controlled trials provided firm scientific evidence that slower growth in
      infancy has long-term benefits for health, which has been used worldwide
      to bring about a change in policy and practice.
    Slow growth and breastfeeding: impacts on national and international
        policies and initiatives
    Contrary to previous public opinion and paediatric clinical practice, a
      slower rate of weight gain in infancy (as seen in breast-fed compared to
      formula-fed infants) is now regarded as desirable for long-term health.
      Such growth patterns are now actively promoted in statements by official
      bodies. Our work has provided important evidence to support the importance
      of breast-feeding for long-term as well as short-term health outcomes, and
      has been widely cited in health and public health policies and initiatives
      in this area.
    In 2006, the World Health Organisation produced revised child growth
      charts, based on the slower rate of growth of breast-fed infants (previous
      charts based on faster growing formula-fed infants). Our research provided
      scientific evidence that a slower pattern of growth had long-term benefits
      for health, which supported the adoption of these charts in the UK and
      elsewhere. The Scientific Advisory Committee on Nutrition (SACN) and Royal
      College of Paediatrics and Child Health joint report on the WHO growth
      charts cited our work, stating that: `current evidence suggests that
        such a (slower) pattern of growth could potentially reduce the later
        risk of obesity' [a]. These charts have now been adapted and
      adopted for use in the UK.
    The research above led to the commission of a review for the UK
      government's Foresight report on `Tackling Obesities: Future Choices'.
      This report states that `Breast-feeding and early growth patterns
        provide the only period in which there is clear evidence to support the
        concept of a critical period of development associated with long-term
        consequences' and `while there is less evidence of a direct link
        between birth weight and obesity, weight gain in early life appears to
        be critical'. It adds `Breast-fed babies show slower
        growth rates than formula-fed babies and this may contribute to the
        reduced risk of obesity later in life shown by breast-fed babies' [b].
    The Scientific Advisory Committee for Nutrition report on the influence
      of maternal, fetal and child nutrition on the development of chronic
      disease later in life, cites references 1-3 above and states: `In
        particular birthweight and birth size, early feeding, and the rate of
        growth in early life modify the prevalence of cardiovascular disease and
        its risk factors (such as blood pressure, adiposity and glucose
        tolerance) and certain cancers' [c].
    In 2011, the US Institute of Medicine's policy on childhood obesity
      stated that health care professionals should `consider the children's
        rate of weight gain when determining which children are at highest risk
        of developing obesity' and they need to `support breast-feeding
        to help prevent future obesity' [d]. Michelle Obama's
      initiative to tackle childhood obesity cites our work on the mechanisms by
      which breast-feeding is beneficial for later risk of obesity along with
      reviews directly based on our work and patents [e].
    Infant formulas: impacts on their formulation and use.
    This research has also led to changes in the nutrition content of infant
      formula with an emphasis on changes to both infant formula composition
      (e.g. lowering of protein content) and volume of consumption in order to
      produce a growth pattern more similar to the breast-fed infant. For
      example, formula manufacturers SMA have detailed on their website aimed at
      professionals how our research has influenced their products [f].
      We have also patented research relating to the composition of infant
      formula and this intellectual property is currently under licence to
      Abbott Nutrition PLC who fund a phase 3 clinical trial to develop a new
      infant formula designed to mimic the growth rate of the breast-fed infant.
      This trial has so far generated [text removed for publication] in
      royalty income for MRC/ICH and over &#163;2.8m in research funding [g].
    Our evidence that promotion of faster growth may have adverse
      consequences for long-term health in infants born small for their
      gestational age (SGA) has led to changes in the management of these
      infants. Regarding long-term metabolic complications in such infants, a
      consensus statement by the International Societies of Paediatric
      Endocrinology and Growth Hormone Research on the management of SGA infants
      (to which Singhal contributed), advised that: `obesity and accelerated
        weight gain are likely to be major risk factors' and `calorie
        dense feeding for SGA infants may not be appropriate' [h].
      As a consequence, nutrient-enriched formulas are no longer recommended for
      use in otherwise healthy infants born low birth weight at term.
    The MEND Programme and Trim Tots: lifestyle interventions for children
    The first MEND programme was developed at Great Ormond Street Hospital
      and the UCL Institute of Child Health, and then in 2004, MEND Central Ltd
      was set up, operating as a social enterprise, to provide the programme
      more widely. Since that time, more than 55,000 individuals have benefitted
      from the programme. It is currently running in more than 200 locations
      across England and Wales, and has been adapted for use in a number of
      other countries around the world [i]. The Greenwich Healthy Living
      Service, who have been running the MEND programme for four years, report
      the following case study about one of their participants: "Since
        attending the MEND programme at the Waterfront Leisure Centre with her
        12 year old daughter Elise, Carmen, a mum from Eltham, has noticed a
        huge improvement in her daughter's eating habits. Carmen has made
        healthy changes to the way she cooks and Elise now tries new things and
        eats a wider range of foods. Carmen and Elise have also been spending
        time together whilst improving their health: `We both joined the gym
        together and we are definitely much more active. The graduate children's
        exercise sessions were also very encouraging because you don't just
        finish the programme; you have something to do which continues to
        motivate the children'" [j].
    We are now piloting a new intervention for younger children, called Trim
      Tots. This is a 24-week programme for families with under-fives, which
      teaches the principles of a healthy lifestyle through art and play. One
      parent who has taken part in this pilot reported: "The simple fact is,
        the lessons we learned and knowledge I have passed on to friends and
        family, has made a big difference to our lives... The Trim Tots
        programme and support for children and families at this vital age needs
        to be widespread. It should be available for all parents as they are the
        building blocks to nurturing a generation of health conscious, educated
        young people" [k].
    
ImpactSummary

    Clinical research conducted at the UCL Institute of Child Health between
      1998 and 2011 under the direction of Professors Alan Lucas and Atul
      Singhal showed that a slower rate of infant weight gain had long-term
      benefits to reduce the risk of obesity and cardiovascular disease. This
      contradicted the accepted view, which favoured the promotion of rapid
      weight gain in infancy. This work has had a significant influence on
      public health policies and initiatives in the UK and elsewhere. It has
      changed the way infant formulas are made and used. Two new interventions
      for overweight children have been developed and are helping families
      around the world.
    
UnderpinningResearch

    This work was initially based on long-term follow-up during the late
      1990s of randomised controlled trials which had originally been set up in
      the 1980s by Lucas to investigate the impact of early nutrition on
      long-term health, a concept termed programming [1]. Although
      extensive data from animal models and small-scale epidemiological studies
      in humans had suggested that growth and nutrition in early life could
      affect, or program, long-term health, the lack of data from experimental
      studies had prevented a causal interpretation in humans.
    Whilst initially studying adolescents born preterm who had been
      randomised to different diets at birth, Singhal showed for the first time
      in humans a causal link between infant nutrition and long-term risk of
      cardiovascular disease and type 2 diabetes [2-5]. He noted large
      benefits for breast-milk feeding in reducing the major risk factors for
      cardiovascular disease (high blood pressure, risk of obesity, insulin
      resistance, markers of inflammation, and high cholesterol concentration)
      and that, contrary to public health and medical opinion at the time,
      faster weight gain in infancy increased the risk of obesity, insulin
      resistance, dyslipidaemia, high blood pressure and endothelial dysfunction
      up to 16 years later [1-6]. Together with Lucas, he proposed the
      `Growth Acceleration' hypothesis which suggested that the long-term
      benefits of breast-feeding for obesity and cardiovascular disease were
      related to slower weight gain in breast-fed compared to formula-fed
      infants and that faster infant growth had adverse consequences for later
      health [3].
    Subsequently, this hypothesis was confirmed by his team in randomised
      trials in infants born at term [7, 8] and by others in over 50
      studies internationally. The proposed impact of infant growth on later
      health was substantial. Studies at UCL, and elsewhere building on this
      work, have suggested that nearly a third of the risk of obesity in
      childhood could be explained by the pattern of infant growth and, on a
      population basis, lowering diastolic blood pressure by breast-feeding or
      by slower infant growth could prevent over 100,000 cardiovascular events
      per year in the US alone (as reviewed [3]).
    As highlighted by a Cochrane systematic review, while childhood obesity
      is a major public health problem, there are few evidence-based
      interventions for its treatment. From 2004, Singhal's team has developed
      and tested community based interventions for the prevention and treatment
      of obesity in both preschool and school aged children. `MEND' (Mind,
      Exercise, Nutrition, Do it), a family-based, community program for obese
      children aged 7-13 years, was designed by Singhal and his PhD student,
      Paul Sacher, as a multi-component, community-based intervention that
      fulfilled NICE guidelines and included behaviour modification, nutrition
      education and physical activity components. The group conducted a
      randomised controlled trial of this intervention and showed it to be
      suitable for widespread prevention and treatment for paediatric obesity [9].
      A related programme `Trim tots' has been introduced for children under the
      age of 5 years.
    