CaseStudyId: 35399
Title: 
    Tocilizumab &#8212; a new treatment for Rheumatoid Arthritis in adults and
      Juvenile Idiopathic Arthritis in children
    

ImpactDetails

    The research described above underpins the routine use in clinical
      practice of tocilizumab for patients with sJIA and RA. Widespread use of
      the drug is reflected by the high levels of sales reported by
      manufacturers Roche, who report 496m CHF (&#163;335m) in sales of the drug in
      just the first half of 2013 (up 33% on the previous year, due to
      increasing demand) [a].
    Rheumatoid Arthritis (RA): Our 2002 paper was the first randomised
      controlled trial showing that inhibition of IL-6 significantly improved
      the signs and symptoms of RA and normalised the acute- phase reactants.
      The first phase III study (CHARISMA [b]) built on our work, citing
      ref [3] as the proof-of-concept, randomised, controlled, dose escalation
      study upon which its design was based. This trial is in turn cited by all
      of the later phase clinical studies that ultimately led to tocilizumab
      being approved by the EMA in January 2009 [c] and by the FDA in
      January 2010 [d] for use in RA. NICE approved its use within the
      UK in August 2010 [e].
    Since this date tocilizumab has been prescribed in every rheumatology
      centre in the UK for patients with severe RA. There is evidence that
      tocilizumab halts joint damage, improves function and increases quality of
      life [f] and hence allows engagement with employment. This is
      articulated well by one patient with RA treated with tocilizumab,
      highlighted in a case study from the National Rheumatoid Arthritis
      Society, who was able to return to work as a result [g].
    Around 690,000 people (~1% population) in the UK have RA. At University
      College London Hospital (UCLH) around 25% of patients with RA are treated
      with a biologic drug, of whom around 10-15% receive tocilizumab (amounting
      to around 50 patients) where other biologic treatments have failed.
      Extrapolating more widely, this suggests that between 15,000 and 20,000
      patients with RA may be being treated with tocilizumab within the UK, and
      hundreds of thousands worldwide.
    sJIA: The initial basic science work of Prof Woo and the first
      early-phase clinical study led by UCL underpinned the large phase III
      study by De Benedetti el al published in the NEJM in 2012, to which UCL
      was the largest UK contributor. This seminal phase III study (also known
      as the TENDER trial) has ultimately led to tocilizumab being licensed for
      use in sJIA by the FDA in May 2013 [h] and by the EMA in June 2013
      [i]. It is adopted as treatment for sJIA around the world.
    The National Institute for Health and Clinical Excellence (NICE)
      recommended use of tocilizumab for sJIA in a technology appraisal in
      December 2011 [j]. This was based on data presented in abstract
      form by De Benedetti et al. prior to the NEJM publication of the full
      article in 2012. This reflects how compelling the data were and the
      potential severity of the condition thus warranting guidelines to be
      issued prior to publication of the full article.
    The use of tocilizumab for sJIA has also been endorsed by the British
      Society of Paediatric and Adolescent Rheumatology (BSAPR) and incorporated
      into their national standards of care [k]. Hence this is now in
      routine use within clinical practice for sJIA and offers patients with
      this severe condition another option in case they do not respond to
      standard treatment with methotrexate.
    Impact on patients with sJIA treated with tocilizumab: Data from
      the national registry of patients being treated with tocilizumab have not
      been published yet, but based on the prevalence of JIA and the proportion
      of those with sJIA refractory to methotrexate it is likely to run into the
      many hundreds. At Great Ormond Street Hospital and UCLH there are
      currently 21 children and adolescent patients being treated with
      tocilizumab who would otherwise have had active disease with its potential
      problems and most likely would have been on high dose steroids and
      suffering the complications of this also.
    There is now evidence to demonstrate that tocilizumab halts radiological
      structural damage of the joints in patients with sJIA [l]. There
      is a direct relationship between prevention of joint damage and
      preservation of function. There is also evidence that tocilizumab restores
      normal growth velocity, which is typically impaired in active sJIA [m].
      The preservation of joints and hence function coupled with the restoration
      of normal growth in children with sJIA being treated with tocilizumab all
      point towards less disability in these patients and hence less dependence
      on healthcare and social services as they progress into adulthood. Hence
      biologic treatment has transformed the long-term outcome of these patients
      as in the pre-biologic era, sJIA was associated with the worst
      disabilities and outcomes in adults [n]. This prevention of
      disability is more likely to lead to patients being able to engage in
      active employment. This extrapolation is supported by long-term outcome
      data showing that adults with childhood onset arthritis are more likely to
      be employed if they have good function, which occurs if arthritis is
      better controlled during childhood due to prevention of damage to joints [o].
    
ImpactSummary

    Research at UCL into the use of tocilizumab has led to a new treatment
      and improved care for patients with juvenile idiopathic arthritis (JIA)
      and rheumatoid arthritis (RA) in adults. The drug is now approved around
      the world and recommended by NICE guidelines and is the standard of care
      in children with systemic onset JIA. It has been prescribed in every
      rheumatology centre in the UK for patients with severe RA. The impact of
      the drug on patients is to prevent disability, halt joint damage, improve
      function and increase quality of life.
    
UnderpinningResearch

    Context: Juvenile idiopathic arthritis (JIA) is the most common
      rheumatological inflammatory disease of children, affecting ~15,000
      children in the UK. The most severe form of JIA is systemic onset (sJIA)
      accounting for around 10% of all JIA patients. This sub-type can cause
      joint pain, damage, blindness, disability and even death, as well as long
      term sequelae (poor growth, low bone density). sJIA is associated with
      potentially fatal complications such as macrophage activation syndrome.
      Some problems such as growth delay and osteoporosis also arise from
      steroids, which may be necessary to treat life-threatening aspects of sJIA
      or very severe arthritis. The level of disability which progresses into
      adulthood often results in long-term dependence. Rheumatoid arthritis in
      adults is a separate condition but shares many features with JIA, notably
      joint pain, destructive joint inflammation with consequent disability and
      systemic complications which if left untreated can be serious or rarely
      life-threatening; similarly, treatment can be limited due to adverse
      effects or loss of effectiveness.
    Early translational work: Interleukin (IL)-6 is a powerful driver
      of inflammation and is produced in response to infection. The UCL group
      led by Professor Woo were the first in 1998 to demonstrate that specific
      genetic variations in the genes that control production of IL6 were
      present in patients with sJIA and that these variations were associated
      with elevated levels of IL6 in the blood of these patients [1]. A
      further study in 2003 Woo's group defined these genetic abnormalities of
      IL6 genes in more detail in different families [2]. These robust
      scientific studies underpinned the rationale for subsequent clinical
      studies targeting IL6 as a treatment for sJIA.
    Early Clinical Studies: Tocilizumab is a monoclonal antibody
      targeted toward the IL6-receptor. In 1999, UCL was one of two UK centres
      running a study into the use of tocilizumab in adult patients, and the
      first outside of Japan to treat adult patients with RA with this drug [3].
      This work was published in 2002 and showed the range of doses of
      toculizumab that had beneficial effects to reduce joint inflammation. In
      2005, Woo led the first clinical, early (phase II) study outside of Japan
      that investigated escalating doses of the drug in sJIA [4]. This
      proof-of-principle study was run by UCL as lead centre with additional
      centres recruiting in Birmingham (UK) and France. The escalating protocol
      was based on the adult trial described above. Of the 18 children who
      participated in the study, 11 were recruited by the UCL lead site.
    Late-Phase Clinical Study: The early phase dose escalation study
      (ref [3]) informed a phase III, multi-centre, international study
      investigating the safety and efficacy of tocilizumab in sJIA. This
      represents the largest randomised, placebo-controlled study ever in this
      relatively rare disease group and in total 112 children participated. This
      study was conducted over five years in 43 participating centres around
      Europe. In total UK contributed eight patients of whom five were from
      UCL/ICH. This study unequivocally demonstrated clear efficacy of
      tocilizumab in sJIA [5].
    