CaseStudyId: 35401
Title: 
    Amyloidosis and acute phase proteins: development of new drugs and a new
      approach to academia-industry collaboration
    

ImpactDetails

    Pepys's drug discovery intellectual property portfolio, comprising more
      than 20 granted patents [a], is held by the UCL spin out company,
      Pentraxin Therapeutics Ltd, which he founded in 2001 [b]. The
      company, created as a vehicle for commercialisation of the IP, was
      initially funded exclusively by loans from UCL totalling more than &#163;1.5
      million and has not sought external investment. It conducts its activities
      entirely through its relationship with UCL and its external collaborations
      and has no employees. In 2009 and 2010, Pentraxin licensed two of its drug
      programmes to GlaxoSmithKline (GSK) in multi-million pound deals and is
      developing them in close collaboration with GSK where several hundred
      employees participate at various levels [c, d]. Pentraxin has
      repaid all its loans from UCL and is now in profit with substantial
      further milestone and royalty payments in prospect if programmes are
      successful.
    The most advanced programme, aiming to eliminate visceral amyloid
      deposits, is the first in class obligate therapeutic partnership of CPHPC,
      a small molecule drug, and a mouse monoclonal anti-human SAP antibody
      which has been fully humanised by GSK. The first human patient studies are
      now in progress and are progressing very well [d, e]. The
      programme has been chosen by GSK as its flagship candidate for potential
      adaptive licensing in the process being led by the MIT Centre for
      Biomedical Innovation through its New Drug Development Paradigms (NEWDIGS)
      initiative. There is a very strong movement towards streamlining and
      improvement of the regulatory licensing pathway for new medicines so that
      patients with unmet medical needs get access to novel treatments more
      rapidly and more efficiently than at present. The UCL/Pentraxin/GSK
      amyloidosis programme is in the vanguard.
    GSK also licensed Pepys's IP covering compounds for treatment of
      transthyretin amyloidosis and the programme has passed its initial
      developability milestone. Typical industry costs for a drug development
      programme to this stage are &#163;6-8 million.
    The discovery and development of CRP inhibitors for myocardial
      infarction, stroke, cancer cachexia and inflammatory diseases has been
      supported by the MRC and BHF and has received expert guidance from GSK.
    Work on SAP depletion by CPHPC for Alzheimer's disease has been supported
      at the experimental level by the MRC. Via the UCLH/UCL BRC, the NIHR is
      now funding preparatory work for the first clinical trial of CPHPC in
      Alzheimer's disease, with GSK as major participants contributing crucially
      to project management, funding and provision of their existing CPHPC
      results. Furthermore GSK have an option to licence CPHPC for this
      indication.
    The transmission of drug discovery directly from a university into big
      pharma is a very rare achievement, particularly across such a broad range
      of different programmes. In 2011, GSK named Professor Pepys as the first
      "academic superstar" in its programme to develop long term ongoing
      partnerships with academia as part of its drug discovery programme [d,
        f]. GSK has changed its R&amp;D model over the last 5 years,
      including the creation of the Academic Discovery Partnership Unit and
      Discovery Partnerships with Academia. The aim is to make the company more
      productive, agile, and focussed on areas of scientific potential [g].
    The Head of the Academic Discovery Partnership Unit at GSK confirmed the
      ways in which close working with the UCL team has been important in
      progress towards bringing a drug to market:
    [Text removed for publication] [d].
    
ImpactSummary

    The UCL Centre for Amyloidosis and Acute Phase Proteins has designed and
      developed new chemical entities targeting serum amyloid P component (SAP),
      C-reactive protein (CRP) and transthyretin, for novel therapeutic
      approaches to amyloidosis, Alzheimer's disease, cardiovascular and
      inflammatory diseases. The UCL spin out company, Pentraxin Therapeutics
      Ltd, founded by Sir Mark Pepys to hold his intellectual property (IP), has
      licensed two programmes to GlaxoSmithKline (GSK). These highly
      synergistic, collaborative multi-million pound developments, strikingly
      exemplify new working relationships between academia and the
      pharmaceutical industry.
    
UnderpinningResearch

    Elucidation by Pepys of the role of SAP in amyloidosis (1977-95) led to
      his invention, in collaboration with Roche, of the bis D-proline drug,
      CPHPC, which produces sustained depletion of circulating SAP by a novel
      pharmacological mechanism, first demonstrated at UCL in the early 2000's [1].
      Patients with systemic amyloidosis are significantly stabilised while
      being treated with CPHPC but the drug does not remove all SAP from their
      amyloid deposits and the amyloid does not regress [4]. These
      observations led Pepys to invent the use of anti-SAP antibodies to target
      residual SAP in the amyloid deposits of CPHPC treated subjects [5].
      The antibodies trigger remarkable, clinically silent elimination of
      visceral amyloid in experimental models, which has not previously been
      achieved. GSK licensed the invention in 2009. They have conducted phase I
      studies of CPHPC in healthy volunteers and amyloidosis patients, have
      fully humanised Pepys's optimal mouse monoclonal anti-human SAP antibody,
      and the first clinical trial of CPHPC plus antibody is currently in
      progress, so far with no adverse effects.
    SAP is universally present in human amyloid deposits, including the
      cerebral and cerebrovascular amyloid deposits in Alzheimer's disease (AD).
      SAP also binds to most neurofibrillary tangles. Brain content of SAP is
      thus higher in AD than in normal subjects, and since SAP is directly
      neurocytotoxic it likely contributes to neurodegeneration, in addition to
      its role in amyloidogenesis. The complete removal of SAP from the
      cerebrospinal fluid, by administration of CPHPC in Alzheimer's disease, is
      thus an attractive therapeutic approach [3]. Experimental work has
      been supported by the MRC and preparatory work for a first clinical trial
      in Alzheimer's disease is currently in progress funded by the NIHR through
      the UCLH/UCL Biomedical Research Centre (BRC) and strongly supported by
      GSK.
    Transthyretin causes both acquired senile cardiac amyloidosis, a hitherto
      grossly under diagnosed condition, and hereditary systemic amyloidosis.
      The Pepys team designed and patented novel small molecule compounds
      targeting transthyretin [6], pursued possible development
      supported by one of the first Wellcome Trust Seeding Drug Discovery
      Initiative awards (&#163;3.89 million), but then licensed the IP to GSK for a
      close collaboration which has yielded new IP.
    Human CRP potently activates complement when it binds to dead and damaged
      cells and this exacerbates tissue damage after ischaemic injury in the
      heart and brain, validating inhibition of CRP binding as a therapeutic
      strategy [2]. Development of Pepys's small molecule CRP inhibitor
      approach has been funded by the first award (&#163;4 million) made by the MRC
      under their Developmental Clinical Studies scheme and latterly also by the
      British Heart Foundation (BHF).
    Pepys joined UCL in 1999, when he was appointed Professor and Head of the
      Department of Medicine at the Royal Free Campus of University College
      London, and is currently Principal Clinical Research Associate and
      Emeritus Professor of Medicine. He was awarded a Knighthood in the 2012
      New Year Honours list for services to biomedicine.
    