CaseStudyId: 36239
Title: 
    Invention and commercial development of diagnostic tests of frontal lobe
      function
    

ImpactDetails

    Every year in Britain, many hundreds of thousands of individuals suffer
      from neurological problems, for example after strokes, head injuries or
      tumours. The measurement of cognitive deficits following frontal lobe
      damage (collectively known as "dysexecutive symptoms") is a major issue
      for the treatment of these patients. It has long been known that patients
      can suffer a wide range of cognitive disabilities such as deficits in
      planning, multitasking, response suppression, etc. which present a severe
      handicap in everyday life. But although we have had good measures of
      intellectual and memory functioning, and also of visual perception,
      language, and motor skills, before our research it was not possible to
      quantify well dysexecutive problems in the clinic because the necessary
      psychometric tools to measure them did not exist.
    Our diagnostic instruments have now been widely adopted by clinicians to
      determine if patients with neurological problems are suffering from
      dysexecutive symptoms. The results of the tests are used to guide
      treatment and make decisions relating to handicap &#8212; for instance, whether
      patients can return home to live independently, or are able to manage
      their own finances. They are also used to assess disability where there
      are issues relating to compensation (e.g. brain damage following car
      accidents).
    The publisher of the four tests reports sales as follows (as at Feb
      2012):
    
      The average sales of these products over the past three years would
        indicate that these tests are administered to approximately 55,000
          patients per year.
      The BADS has been translated into six languages (Brazilian
        Portuguese, Chinese, Dutch, German, Greek and Russian) and the BADS-C
        has been translated into Dutch. Over 15 research permissions have also
        been agreed for these tests over the past five years.
      The tests are sold around the world including in the UK,
        Australia/New Zealand, Denmark, France, Germany, Netherlands, Norway,
        Spain, Sweden, India, Canada, USA, as well as being distributed by local
        publishing partners in other countries across Europe, Asia, Africa and
        South America [a].
    
    The Hayling and Brixton Tests
      The Hayling and Brixton Tests together measure three of the most common
      symptoms of the dysexecutive syndrome [b]. Firstly, the Hayling
      Test measures response suppression (the ability to withhold an
      inappropriate behaviour). The pre-existing measure of this ability (the
      "Stroop Test") provides a false negative rate too high for most clinical
      purposes, and the Hayling Test has now largely supplanted it in the UK.
      Secondly, the Hayling Test measures response initiation. Despite being one
      of the most commonly reported dysexecutive problems (approximately 27% of
      all neurological rehabilitation patients show this problem) there was no
      pre-existing formal measure for it, so the Hayling Test filled this
      clinical need. Thirdly, the Brixton Test is a test of rule attainment. It
      has now supplanted the test previously in most common use (the Wisconsin
      Card Sort Test &#8212; WCST), having addressed a major concern with that test &#8212;
      that guessing could not be detected.
    The BADS test battery
      The BADS test battery is a suite of psychometric tasks which can be
      administered together to gain an overall diagnostic picture of the
      patient's dysexecutive problems [c]. This was devised for wider
      clinical use than the Hayling and Brixton Tests, and can be administered
      by qualified occupational therapists and some other personnel who have
      specific training but who are not medical doctors or Chartered
      Psychologists. Like the Hayling and Brixton tests, it has also gained wide
      acceptance as a standard diagnostic instrument, and its use is presented
      in many standard texts [d].
    BADS-C
      Researchers and clinicians who work with children found the logic of the
      adult version of the BADS compelling, but wanted a version which was
      suitable for children. Accordingly, the BADS-C was created, and is used
      specifically to measure dysexecutive symptoms in children with
      neurological problems, as well as a range of psychiatric and developmental
      conditions where frontal lobe dysfunction is a feature [e].
    The Rookwood Driving Battery
      Damage to the frontal lobes can cause a range of cognitive disabilities
      and changes in behaviour, some of which can affect a person's fitness to
      drive a vehicle. A 2007 study [f] found that three sub-tests from
      the BADS battery were useful in predicting on-road performance among
      people who had suffered some form of neuropathology, and these were
      incorporated (along with other tests from other authors) into a battery of
      tests specifically designed for driving assessment, which was named the
      Rookwood Driving Battery [g]. This is the only tool of its kind
      available in the world, and it is used in a wide range of conditions,
      including brain injury [h] and dementia [i].
    Use of the tests in clinical practice
      The tests described above have been widely adopted in clinical practice. A
      recent survey by the Division of Neuropsychology of the British
      Psychological Society (the principal representative body for
      neuropsychologists in the UK) asked members which of the many available
      tests they choose to use in their day-to-day practice for measuring
      frontal lobe cognitive deficits. The three most commonly used tests, out
      of the many invented over the last 100 years, were the BADS and the
      Brixton Tests (both 89% of respondents), and the Hayling Test (81%) [j].
    Training on the diagnostic tests is now integrated into the professional
      training of e.g. clinical psychologists, occupational therapists, and
      psychiatrists. For instance a recent exam paper prepared by the
      Examinations Unit at the Royal College of Psychiatrists included a
      question on the correct use of the Hayling Test [k].
    In 2010 Burgess received the "President's Award for Distinguished
      Contributions to Psychological Knowledge" from the British Psychological
      Society, and the invention of these tests (as well as the resulting
      knowledge) was cited as a principal reason for the award [l].
    Use of the tests in legal proceedings
      The impact of these diagnostic procedures has also extended beyond the
      clinic. In New South Wales, Australia, for example, the Offender
      Assessment Unit recommends the Hayling and Brixton tests for measuring
      executive function in offenders [m]. In the case of The Crown vs.
      David Waterhouse (Bradford Crown Court, February 2008) evidence of
      diagnostic information provided by the Hayling Test was presented to the
      court in reference to a matter of responsibility in consideration of a
      charge of attempted murder. The defence argued that the defendant,
      following a frontal lobe injury, was incapable of stopping himself from
      stabbing his 14-year-old stepdaughter several times with a kitchen knife.
      But the result of the psychometric testing was accepted as evidence that
      this was not a safe interpretation of events, and the defendant was
      convicted [n].
    
ImpactSummary

    Based on his research at the UCL Institute of Cognitive Neuroscience,
      Professor Paul Burgess invented and co-invented several cognitive tests
      (known as the Hayling and Brixton Tests, and the BADS and BADS-C
      assessment batteries) which are used to detect dysfunction of the frontal
      lobes of the brain. These were developed for commercial production by
      Burgess and are now produced and marketed by the largest test publisher in
      the world (Pearson Assessment). There are versions in several different
      languages, and they are used in clinics worldwide to diagnose problems in
      a wide variety of patients with neurological, psychiatric and
      developmental problems. The tests are now administered around the world to
      around 55,000 patients per year.
    
UnderpinningResearch

    In the mid-1990s, Burgess was investigating whether different sub-regions
      of a large brain region known as the prefrontal cortex support different
      mental abilities in humans, and if so, which regions support which
      ability. As part of these experimental and theoretical studies, a series
      of new psychometric measures were invented. There were two principal
      projects as part of this programme of research, which each led to new
      diagnostic instruments.
    The first, which led to the development of the Hayling and Brixton Tests,
      arose from work originally conducted in the Neuropsychology Department of
      the National Hospital for Neurology and Neurosurgery, where patients with
      acute neurological problems (principally brain tumours) were studied by
      Burgess. This work was conducted in collaboration with Professor Tim
      Shallice FRS (now Emeritus Professor at UCL.) The theoretical research
      emerging from this work was published in a series of studies between 1996
      and 2006 [1-6] with the development of the tools for clinical
      rather than experimental use occurring during 1997. The experimental
      research showed that three of the most common symptoms of dysfunction of
      the frontal lobes of the brain which were hitherto thought to co-occur as
      part of a syndrome, were in fact quite distinct. This meant that they
      should therefore be examined separately, and that screening for frontal
      lobe dysfunction would be much more effective if this happened. The newly
      developed tools provided a way to do this, using normative data collected
      on the same set of individuals, allowing comparisons in performance across
      the tasks, which is particularly important for detecting deficit.
    The second research programme involved invention of psychometric
      instruments that would be aimed particularly at predicting everyday
      handicap in people who had suffered neurological problems. This was a
      collaboration with a research group at the MRC Cognition and Brain
      Sciences Unit, Cambridge (Professor Barbara Wilson OBE), Professor
      Jonathan Evans (Glasgow University) and Professor Nicholas Alderman FBPS
      (St. Andrew's Hospital, Northampton). Data was collected at St. Andrew's
      Hospital, The Oliver Zangwill Neurological Rehabilitation Unit (Ely) and
      the Rivermead Neurological Rehabilitation Centre (Oxford). These new
      experimental measures of frontal lobe function proved both more sensitive
      at detecting problems in the clinic than the existing diagnostic ones, and
      also better predicted handicap in everyday life. The new instruments were
      first commercially produced in 1996 (called the BADS battery), with new
      and updated versions produced from 1998-2013. Subsequently, these
      instruments proved to be of clinical utility for a wider variety of
      population groups than just neurological patients, and suitable for a
      greater range of uses than originally thought. Consequently, in 2003 a
      version of the BADS battery adapted for use with children was produced
      (called the BADS-C). Furthermore, specific subtasks invented by Burgess as
      part of the original BADS battery were also found to be predictive of
      real-world driving ability following neurological insult and so were
      developed for this purpose though a collaboration with Pat McKenna,
      Consultant Neuropsychologist, Rookwood Hospital, Cardiff. This "Rookwood
      Driving Battery" was first marketed commercially in 2009.
    