CaseStudyId: 36242
Title: 
    Economic and health benefits of a new method of assessing atrophy
      progression in Alzheimer's disease: the Boundary Shift Integral technique
    

ImpactDetails

    UCL's impact on the way that international trials in Alzheimer's disease
      use brain imaging has been considerable. Our Boundary Shift Integral
      method has provided a precise, regulatory- compliant means of assessing
      whether a potential treatment for Alzheimer's disease could modify the
      disease course by slowing the rate of atrophy. It has therefore had a
      significant impact on clinical trial protocols across phases 2-3 by
      reducing the number of patients needed for imaging outcomes, thus reducing
      costs and reducing participant exposure to potential side effects.
      Additionally the techniques have been shown to be useful clinically -
      individuals with very early Alzheimer's disease show increased rates of
      brain atrophy relative to healthy controls.
    Adoption of our methods in clinical trials: Historically,
      image analysis for trial outcomes involved relatively crude and expensive
      manual measurements of brain volumes or regions from imaging at baseline
      and end of study to try to show an effect of the therapy on the
      progression of atrophy. The method of choice was manual tracing of regions
      of interest on a brain scan. These measures were limited to those areas
      easy to define (e.g. hippocampus) but more importantly were manual, and
      therefore both labour intensive and error prone. Our image analysis
      methods removed the need for these manual measurements and at the same
      time also greatly improved the precision and reliability of the measures
      (5 times lower variance on scan-rescan testing) [a]. This led to
      its increasing uptake as the method of choice for AD trials (and now other
      diseases).
    The Boundary Shift Integral has become the most widely used method of
      analysing brain atrophy in trials in Alzheimer's disease and in related
      disorders. Trials using UCL's techniques include most recently the largest
      international immunotherapy trials in AD led by Elan/Janssen and
      Pfizer/Wyeth [b], [c]. The method provides a biomarker
      that can be used as a clinical trial endpoint to establish whether a
      candidate drug can slow brain atrophy (a long established downstream
      effect of the disease). Many trial protocols (including from Pfizer,
      Wyeth, Elan, Janssen, Roche, BMS) have used this analysis as a secondary
      endpoint. Lundbeck chose to use the Boundary Shift Integral measure as
      their primary outcome to assess whether memantine had any
      disease-modification effects in Alzheimer's disease [d]. (The
      study showed no benefit of memantine on rates of brain atrophy.)
    Furthermore, the European Medicines Agency has recently issued draft
      opinion indicating that magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) of hippocampal
      volume is a valid approach for selecting people in the early,
      pre-dementia, stages of Alzheimer's disease (AD) for clinical trials [e].
    Economic benefits to pharmaceutical companies: The use of
      image analysis allows trials to be conducted using far fewer subjects than
      would have been needed to power a study using clinical outcomes. The
      memantine trial described above was conducted in fewer than half as many
      subjects as would have been needed otherwise (power calculations conducted
      by Lundbeck - see [e]). This effectively reduced the cost to the
      company of this study by several million dollars. Furthermore, trial
      participant exposure to potential side-effects was reduced.
    Economic benefits to companies providing services to the
          pharmaceutical industry: Introduction of our techniques has
      also had a significant benefit to the UK economy, through the provision of
      image analysis services to foreign companies. The image analysis unit at
      the Dementia Research Unit has provided ~&#163;5m in image analysis services to
      Janssen, Elan, Pfizer, Wyeth, and Lundbeck in the 2008-13 period [f].
      IXICO (an Imaging CRO providing end to end imaging solutions for clinical
      trials) uses our boundary shift integral technique under licence and has
      attracted a number of large contracts [g]. They report that:
    "Between January 2008 and July 2013, we used the BSI with three of the
        world's top 10 pharmaceutical companies and small biotechs, including on
        high-profile pivotal trials of potential treatments for mild-moderate
        Alzheimer's Disease, and prodromal Alzheimer's disease. We have
        processed 10s of thousands of patient images in this period... IXICO's
        ability to offer BSI to pharmaceutical companies enabled UCL technology
        to continue to have high impact in clinical trial market at a time when
        many pharmaceutical companies were reducing their use of academic groups
        for image analysis in large clinical trials... Involvement of IXICO in
        pivotal trials in which the Boundary Shift Integral was one of the
        services we offered contributed to IXICO's significant growth in revenue
        and reaching profitability during the 2008-2013 period."
    Furthermore, in the US, our techniques have been used in a large number
      of studies by image analysis companies e.g. Bioclinica [h] and
      Synarc [i], who report that:
    "The development, validation and introduction of the Boundary Shift
        Integral (BSI) was Widely recognized as a major advance for the field.
        The BSI subsequently established itself as one of the most important
        techniques for the measurement of rates of atrophy in AD clinical
        trials. The BSI has been employed in many of the most high profile
        international clinical trials including several of those analysed by
        Synarc. In the period January 2008 - July 2013 Synarc has used this
        technique in 12 clinical trials. The contribution of the BSI along with
        the broader work by Professor Nick Fox is widely recognized as being
        very important in the industry. His work in developing
        registration-based methods or measuring brain changes and the use of the
        BSI to quantify atrophy measurements has been seen as a standard against
        which other techniques are compared. These developments have had a major
        commercial impact well beyond academia."
    Use in investigating other diseases: The Boundary Shift
      Integral technique is not simply applicable to Alzheimer's disease. Its
      use has now begun to spread to the investigation of other diseases,
      including Huntington's disease [j], frontotemporal dementia and MS
      [k].
    
ImpactSummary

    Our research has had a major impact on the way pharmaceutical trials in
      Alzheimer's disease are conducted. The Boundary Shift Integral technique,
      which we developed and validated, has changed commercial practice and has
      become the industry standard for measuring atrophy progression. Our
      methods have largely replaced previous manual measures and in 2008-13 were
      used in over 20 large international trials. This had significant economic
      benefits for several companies providing image analysis services. For UCL
      alone they generated over &#163;5m of industrial contracts. Additionally,
      through licensing and collaboration, UCL's research contributed to IXICO
      establishing a significant market share in this important commercial area.
    
UnderpinningResearch

    Research at UCL led by Professors Nick Fox and Martin Rossor (both
      Department of Neurodegeneration) since the mid-1990s has had a particular
      focus on improving diagnosis and the measurement of disease progression in
      Alzheimer's disease (AD) and related disorders. Cerebral atrophy had long
      been recognised as characteristic of AD. The initial interest was in
      describing brain changes to improve diagnosis. Detailed volumetric work
      showed that certain cerebral regions (e.g. the hippocampus) were reduced
      in volume very early in AD. The diagnostic utility of these measurements
      was, however, confounded by the wide natural variation between
      individuals. Rates of atrophy, using each individual as their own control,
      provided a means of reducing the effect of this wide between-individual
      variability. Measurement of within-individual change requires a high level
      of precision and our research then aimed to address this problem. We (Fox
      and Rossor) showed that registration-based measures allowed sensitive
      assessment of change [1]. We then developed a novel technique (the
      Boundary Shift Integral) for quantifying changes in brain volume from
      rigid-body registration of serial MRI. We were able to show that the
      method had a very high level of precision (10x greater than previous
      methods) [2, 8].
    In a decade of subsequent research we refined, developed and validated
      the techniques. In collaboration with Dr Kelvin Leung and Professor
      Sebastien Ourselin (UCL Centre for Medical Image Computing) we introduced
      methods to deal with potential artefacts and differences between scanners
      that are an inevitable feature of multi-centre international commercial
      trials [8]. Not only have these methods found diagnostic clinical
      use they have been adopted for use in monitoring disease progression and
      assessing therapeutic effects in trials designed to show disease
      modification [1, 7].
    Rates of atrophy measured with our techniques have been shown to
      correlate with cognitive decline in AD [3]. Sample size estimates
      for disease progression trials have been estimated and shown to provide
      significantly greater power than alternative manual measures [4, 8].
      Our Boundary Shift Integral measures were chosen as one of the reference
      methods for the large open-access Alzheimer's Disease Neuroimaging
      Initiative (ADNI) study (800 subjects, several thousand MR brain scans);
      using this data-set we (Fox, Leung, Ourselin) showed the method to produce
      competitive sample size estimates [8]. The sensitivity and power
      of our techniques has been recognised in European (EFNS) guidelines and
      consensus statements on neuroimaging and in several review articles. More
      importantly these techniques have had a major impact on natural history
      studies and on the way clinical trials of potential disease modifying
      therapies for Alzheimer's disease have been conducted [5, 6, 8].
    We continue to develop and extend the methods and now have fully
      automated measures of rates of whole brain or regional atrophy (e.g.
      hippocampus) from serial MRI and can accommodate differences in MRI
      acquisition inherent in different scanners. We have shown that we can
      detect (with high sensitivity) and correct important scanner artefacts
      such as voxel scaling errors. This has added robustness to precision and
      allowed MRI clinical trial data to be used when previously it may have
      been discarded [8].
    