CaseStudyId: 36268
Title: 
    Improving reading and visual search in stroke patients
    

ImpactDetails

    Outcomes for patients have improved
    There are at least three peer-reviewed articles proving that moving text
      therapy is effective for hemianopic alexia, with the first dating back to
      1993. Despite this, until the launch of Read-Right, the therapy was not
      available for suitable patients to access. We decided to make the therapy
      freely available.
    Read-Right went live in June 2010 and has had 16,703 unique
      visitors generating 177,078 page views from 30,878 visits. 38% of visits
      are returning visitors. 657 patients with hemianopic alexia have
      used or are using the site.
    Eye-Search went live in September 2012 and has had 3,090 unique
      visitors generating 37,885 page views from 7,281 visits. An impressive
      57.5% of visits are returning visitors. 217 patients with
      hemianopia have used or are using the site.
    Patients from all over the world can benefit from these applications. At
      present, the top five countries where users log in from are: UK (48%), USA
      (25%), Australia (10%), Canada (3%) and Japan (3%) [a].
    Patients can fill in an on-line questionnaire to let us know how much
      they have benefitted or not. Not everyone fills it in, but those who do
      rate Read-Right as 7.7/10 and report that they are now reading between 30
      and 60 minutes more per day.
    One patient reported that "Read-Right has restored my self-belief and
        allowed me to take control of my own recovery" [b].
    A novel clinical intervention has been developed, trialled and
        positive outcome demonstrated
    Both websites contain clinically-proven therapeutic interventions that
      have been trialled in phase II studies. The data collected from patients
      using the applications are akin to a phase IV clinical trial (real-world
      efficacy outside close monitoring that occurs in smaller trials). This has
      led to two peer- reviewed publications to date [see section 3]. It
      is the first time that web-based therapies for neurological conditions
      have been proven to work.
    Public involvement in research has improved
    Since 2008, 42 patients with hemianopia have helped us in person to
      develop both therapy web sites. Most have come on one or more occasion to
      UCL Multimedia to 'beta' test various components of each application. Many
      more patients (~100) have been involved in online testing and have
      provided feedback once the therapy applications have been released. This
      has led to changes being made to the 'live' versions.
    One patient, Mr Mark Jarvis, has been heavily involved in developing the
      applications and engaging with the research. Jarvis helped Read-Right
      through many iterations. He also fronts the explanatory video that appears
      on the website and on the UCL part of YouTube [c] (675 views to 31
      July 2013). He was also the focus of a Mail on Sunday article
      (11th Jul 2010) [d].
    Jarvis and Leff have subsequently taken part in a Research Volunteers
      Workshop UCL (10 Jun 2011), highlighting the patient involvement in
      development Read-Right [e].
    Public awareness of a health benefit has been raised
    Read-Right was profiled as an example of how patients with stroke could
      embrace new technology to improve their outcome in Media Planet
      (distributed with The Independent) in May 2010 [f] and in
      an article in the Daily Express (15 January 2013) [g].
    The Stroke Association have highlighted both web applications in press
      releases and also on their website. Read-Right has also featured in Stroke
      Matters (Nov 2010), a publication that goes out quarterly to all
      subscribers (free) [h].
    
ImpactSummary

    Research by Dr Alex Leff at the UCL Institute of Neurology in
      collaboration with UCL Multimedia, has led to the development of two free
      online therapies for stroke patients with visual deficits. Read-Right
      (launched June 2010) treats patients with hemianopic alexia (the commonest
      acquired reading disorder) and Eye-Search (launched September 2012) treats
      spatial disorientation and visual search impairment. The websites contain:
      1) diagnostic tests, 2) therapy, and 3) interval tests. These materials
      have been developed from peer-reviewed research. The websites are also
      research tools; patients sign an online consent form and their data are
      used to test whether online therapy actually works. At 31 July 2013, 657
      patients were using Read-Right and 217 Eye-Search.
    
UnderpinningResearch

    Dr Leff is a world expert on hemianopia, how this affects reading, and
      how it can be remediated [1, 2]. Initial work demonstrated that
      patients with hemianopia (a visual field defect), that affected their text
      reading, could benefit from reading moving text. This was done in the
      context of a placebo-controlled trial [3].
    In that study, the therapy materials (moving text) were recorded onto VCR
      tapes and posted to participating patients. When it proved successful,
      there was no clear way to make the therapy available for suitable
      patients. Leff therefore began a collaboration with the UCL Multimedia
      team (Maurice Brown, Multimedia Developer and Patrick Robinson, Multimedia
      Manager) who suggested using the internet to deliver the moving-text
      therapy. A working prototype was developed but it soon became clear that
      more resources would be required to deliver a patient-friendly version
      that could be used without the help of a health-care professional. This
      prompted two immediate questions: if patients were to use the therapy
      themselves, how would they know they had the condition? And, how would
      they know if the therapy was working for them? Leff expanded the brief to
      include an online visual field test and interval tests of reading ability
      that users would be directed back to after set periods of practice. He
      applied to The Stroke Association and received a research grant for
      &#163;162,000 to make the Read-Right website a therapy and research tool. The
      bulk of the grant was used to fund the salary of a full-time web designer
      (Yean-Hoon Ong) who is responsible for the design, functionality and
      user-support of both sites.
	  Patients with hemianopic alexia were recruited
      from Leff's NHS hemianopia clinical service at the National Hospital for
      Neurology and Neurosurgery, UCLH. They have been actively involved in the
      design of both websites, meeting regularly with Ong and Leff to
      iteratively test and implement all aspects of the sites.
    The visual field test was validated in a study undertaken at the
      Institute of Neurology in 2011. The results were published in 2012 with an
      accompanying editorial commentary on 'internet teleneurology' [4].
      Analysis of the Read-Right patient data in 2011 demonstrated significant
      therapeutic effects on reading speeds comparable with previous trials,
      achieving a clear dose effect of 46% after 20 hours of practice [5].
    Prompted by the success of Read-Right, Leff decided to apply to The
      Stroke Association for a no-cost extension to allow Ms Ong to work on a
      new, more ambitious therapy site that would target the more common problem
      that almost all patients with hemianopia have: difficulty finding things.
      The Eye-Search therapy web app contains: a more effective version of the
      Read-Right visual field test; a sensitive test of visual neglect
      (developed with the help of Professor Masud Husain, UCL); an activities of
      daily living assessment (developed with the help of Stephanie Wolff,
      occupational therapist, Manchester); and a timed test of visual search
      (main outcome measure). The therapy, finding a ball that jumps
      semi-predictably into the affected visual field, has been shown by the
      team to improve visual search speeds in patients with hemianopia [6].
    