CaseStudyId: 36300
Title: 
    Natalizumab: a potent treatment for highly active relapsing-remitting
      multiple sclerosis
    

ImpactDetails

    Multiple sclerosis (MS) is the most common disabling neurological disease
      of young adults in the UK, affecting 1 in 800 of the population. It is
      associated with high health care and socioeconomic costs and a markedly
      reduced quality of life. The first available disease-modifying treatments
      &#8212; beta interferon and glatiramer acetate &#8212; were introduced in the 1990s
      but proved to have only limited effectiveness in preventing relapses and
      with only equivocal effects on related disability, and there remained a
      pressing need for more effective treatments. Furthermore, a NICE
      technology appraisal in 2002 found that these first-line treatments were
      not cost effective for use in the NHS and since then they have only been
      available to treat MS patients through a unique Department of Health Risk
      Sharing Scheme that was designed to ensure, through long term monitoring
      over ten years of a large patients cohort (2002-15), that cost
      effectiveness is achieved.
    Following the pivotal phase 3 trial of natalizumab described
      above, a full UK National Institute of Health and Clinical Excellence
      (NICE) technology appraisal of natalizumab was undertaken in 2007. The
      outcome was that natalizumab became the first NICE-recommended
      disease-modifying treatment for MS available in the UK National Health
      Service. The drug was also approved by regulatory authorities for the
      treatment of active relapsing remitting MS in many countries around the
      world (see full details below).
    Key impacts: benefits for MS patients
    The following major clinical benefits of natalizumab for people with MS
      were identified in the phase 3 trial [see 5, above]:
    
      Relapse rate was reduced by two thirds in natalizumab-treated compared
        to placebo-treated patients; in a subgroup of patients with highly
        active relapsing remitting MS (who had had at least two relapses in the
        prior 12 months), the reduction in relapse rate achieved by natalizumab
        was 81%; furthermore, natalizumab reduced the rate of hospitalisations
        by 64% and the need of steroid treatment for relapses by 69% [a].
      50% fewer people treated with natalizumab developed a persistent
        increase in disability when compared with those treated with placebo.
        This reduction in disability accrual was even higher at 64% in the
        subgroup with highly active disease. Natalizumab is the first treatment
        for MS to show a large and unequivocal effect in preventing irreversible
        disability. A substantial number of natalizumab-treated patients
        actually experienced a reduction in their level of disability when
        compared with their status before entering the trial.
      Clinically significant visual loss during the trial was reduced by 35%
        in natalizumab-treated patients compared to placebo, and overall visual
        function remained stable in natalizumab-treated patients whereas it
        deteriorated in placebo-treated subjects [b]

      Health-related quality of life, which is often substantially impaired
        in people with MS, was significantly improved in patients treated with
        natalizumab [c]. The improvements were seen in both physical and
        mental components of quality of life measures.
      Natalizumab also reduced the risk of a confirmed worsening of
        cognitive function by 43% compared with placebo [a].
    
    Licensing and prescription of natalizumab
    Following the phase 3 clinical trials, natalizumab (trade name Tysabri)
      was granted regulatory approval in the United States (FDA, 2006) [d],
      European Union (EMEA, 2006) [e], Canada [f] and Australia
      [g]. It was recommended in 2007 by the UK National Institute for
      Health and Clinical Excellence as a clinically and cost effective
      treatment in the NHS for patients with rapidly evolving severe relapsing
      remitting MS [h]. The Medical Director (UK) at Biogen (the
      manufacturers of natalizumab) has confirmed that there is "No doubt
        that the input from Dr Miller's research collaboration was an important
        contribution to the regulatory license application for Marketing
        approval by the relevant regulatory authorities" [i].
    As a result of these approvals, natalizumab is now widely used to treat
      patients with highly active relapsing remitting MS. By December 2011, over
      99,000 people worldwide had been treated with natalizumab [j].
      Since that time, usage has continued to grow, with Biogen reporting sales
      of $1.6bn (an increase of 8%) for 2012 [k]. By July 2013, over
      115,000 patients had been treated [l].
    As well as the direct financial benefits to Biogen in terms of sales, the
      licensing of natalizumab has resulted in increased employment and economic
      benefits in the US and Europe [m].
    Contribution to guidelines
    Due to the rare complication of PML, natalizumab is largely used as a
      second-line treatment in highly active MS. Guidelines have been developed
      for treatment and monitoring of people who are treated with natalizumab
      and Yousry and Miller have contributed to these guidelines [n]. A
      key part of clinical monitoring of patients treated with natalizumab is to
      perform regular MRI scans looking for evidence of PML. Yousry has headed
      an international panel that has identified the radiological features
      typical of PML in natalizumab-treated patients; the panel has also
      recommended MRI protocols for monitoring patients [o].
    
ImpactSummary

    Multiple Sclerosis (MS) is the most common disabling neurological disease
      of young adults in the UK, affecting 1 in 800 of the population. In most
      patients the early years are characterised by relapse and remissions;
      relapses are often disabling and permanent disability occurs when
      remissions fail to recover fully. Research at the UCL Institute of
      Neurology &#8212; from early MRI studies through phase 1-3 clinical trials &#8212; has
      resulted in the licensing of natalizumab for highly active relapsing
      remitting MS. Natalizumab is now widely used to treat such patients with
      very good efficacy and close monitoring. Natalizumab is a potent treatment
      that has reduced relapse rate by two-thirds and relapse-related disability
      by 50%. By July 2013, over 115,000 patients around the world had received
      this treatment.
    
UnderpinningResearch

    Serial magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) studies at the Institute of
      Neurology showed that blood-brain barrier (BBB) breakdown is a key early
      event in new lesion formation in relapsing remitting MS [1], and
      the work of the Unit played a lead role in defining protocols for using
      MRI in proof-of concept trials of potential new disease modifying
      treatments [2]. The evidence for the important role of BBB leakage
      provided a rationale for investigating natalizumab, a monoclonal
      anti-adhesion molecule antibody that was shown to prevent trafficking of
      mononuclear white blood cells from blood to brain in an experimental model
      of MS.
    Members of the Nuclear Magnetic Resonance (NMR) Unit, led by Professor
      David Miller, investigated the efficacy of natalizumab by performing
      central MRI analysis of multicentre Phase 1/2a and Phase 2b
      placebo-controlled trials in relapsing MS using MRI lesion activity as the
      primary outcome measure.
    The phase 1/2a study was a UK-based, parallel-group, placebo-controlled
      trial in which Miller was the principal investigator. Study subjects
      received two doses of placebo or natalizumab one month apart and were
      followed up with regular MRI scans for six months. The study reached its
      primary end point: the adjusted mean cumulative number of new active
      lesions was lower after three months in the natalizumab-treated group than
      in the placebo group (1.8 vs 3.6; P=.04, analysis of covariance) [3].
      In an accompanying editorial, the trial finding was described as a "near
      hit." Had the study not reached its primary end point, one could speculate
      that it would have been a near miss and that the drug would not have been
      investigated further.
    A subsequent phase 2b multicentre, multinational study was undertaken in
      patients with relapsing remitting MS or secondary progressive MS that
      tested placebo vs. natalizumab in two doses given intravenously every
      month for six months, followed by a six-month observation, and was
      robustly powered to detect an effect on MRI lesion activity. This study
      demonstrated profound (90%) suppression of new gadolinium-enhancing
      lesions during a six-month treatment phase. Although not powered to do so
      it showed a significant reduction in relapse rate in the
      natalizumab-treated arms. Magnetic resonance imaging activity returned to
      baseline levels during the six-month post-treatment observation period [4].
    Together with Dr Gavin Giovannoni (also UCL), Miller was leading
      investigator in the large phase 3, multicentre, placebo-controlled trial
      that followed, with Miller's group providing central MRI analysis for the
      trial. This trial showed that natalizumab treatment was associated with a
      two-thirds reduction in relapse rate compared with placebo and a reduction
      in the accumulation of disability by 50% [5]. It also reduced the
      rate of new lesion formation by ~90%.
    The phase 3 trials of natalizumab did, however, identify a serious
      adverse effect: about one person in 1,000 developed progressive multifocal
      leucoencephalopathy (PML), a severe and sometimes fatal viral brain
      disease. Professor Tarek Yousry (Department of Brain Repair and
      Rehabilitation, UCL Institute of Neurology) led an international group
      that defined the risk for PML [6] and he and Miller have since
      contributed to subsequent guidelines for monitoring natalizumab-treated
      patients for early detection of PML. Risk counselling and monitoring for
      PML is an extremely important part of current treatment with natalizumab
      and is discussed in a recent review by Miller and Dr Jeremy Chataway (also
      UCL) [7].
    