CaseStudyId: 36315
Title: 
    Research-driven advances in surgical techniques lead to improved patient
      outcomes after Deep Brain Stimulation
    

ImpactDetails

    The research described above has had immediate impact on the clinical
      outcomes of over 420 patients who have undergone DBS in the UCL Functional
      Neurosurgery Unit since November 2002. As a result of the success of the
      procedure, the number of referrals is increasing year on year. During the
      period January 2008 to July 2013, 243 new DBS implantation procedures were
      performed with a year-on-year increase in number. (By the end of 2013, 98
      new procedures will have been performed compared with 68 in 2012, 46 in
      2011 and 43 in 2010) [a].
    The benefits for patients of our improved surgical techniques are
      considerable. We have demonstrated that we can improve the underlying
      severity of PD using DBS by ~55%, with accompanying improvements in
      quality of life (equal to any other series in the world), while the risks
      associated with the surgery at our centre are lower than those seen
      anywhere worldwide. Indeed, in our ongoing audit of adverse events, we
      have not detected a single symptomatic intracerebral haemorrhage in
      comparison with symptomatic haemorrhage rates of 2% worldwide [b].
      Compared to traditional methods, we have achieved a low rate of adverse
      events through the use of an image-guided and image-verified surgical
      methodology that provides the ability to accurately and precisely place
      electrodes with the use of a single brain penetration. Reduced haemorrhage
      rates translate to reduced patient disability, paralysis or death. In our
      centre, 97% of electrodes are placed with a single brain penetration. This
      approach has the additional advantage that the whole procedure can be
      performed under general anaesthesia which is far better tolerated by
      patients. Furthermore, we can now avoid stimulation-induced speech
      disturbance through better placing of electrodes. An independent expert in
      the field described our work as "a new benchmark for all centres
        involved in PD surgery" [c].
    Our excellent safety record with DBS for PD has provided the reassurance
      and confidence necessary to embark on pioneering clinical trials using DBS
      as an experimental treatment for other disabling conditions, in which the
      potential benefits of the surgery are less certain and therefore the known
      risks of the operation must be minimised. Following initial success and
      publication of treating five patients [d], we have recruited a
      further 10 patients to date, to a double blind crossover trial of DBS for
      severe, treatment-refractory Tourette syndrome [e]. We have also
      recruited and operated on two patients in an MRC-funded double blind
      crossover trial of DBS for severe treatment-refractory Obsessive
      Compulsive Disorder and a single patient to a Brain Research Trust-funded
      double blind crossover trial of DBS for Parkinson's disease dementia [f],
      all of which are led by our team and continue recruitment in our Unit.
    Further testimony to the impact that DBS performed in our Unit has on
      patients can be seen in a number of media features on our work:
    
      In May 2013, an episode of Keeping Britain Alive: The NHS in a Day
        on BBC2 featured two patients undergoing DBS in our hospital [g].
      In December 2011, Sky News featured a woman who was treated with DBS
        for the symptoms of Tourette syndrome. The patient stated that "It is
          absolutely amazing. I do not feel I am the same person. I have had
          three years of getting worse. Now I have got my life back" [h].
      The website of the Brain Research Trust features the story of one of
        our patients, a 62 year old woman with a genetic form of dystonia
        (DYT-1). She describes the results of the surgery as follows: "the
          improvement I feel in my walking is beyond my wildest expectations:
          it's actually 95%" [i].
    
    The clinical activity of our Unit and academic output has attracted a
      large number of visitors from around the UK and overseas. The
      neurosurgical techniques, patient selection process and post-operative
      management pathways developed through our research have been used for the
      instruction of over 75 visiting neurosurgeons, neurologists and clinical
      trainees over 2009-13. The research-evidenced standard of care in place at
      NHNN has disseminated to multiple other centres throughout the world
      including European centres (Groningen and the Karolinska Institute), and
      in the United states (Atlanta and UCLA) where the local functional
      neurosurgical teams have changed their surgical approach following visits
      to, or publications by our Unit [j]. Furthermore, attendance in
      our Unit with instruction in patient selection, surgical procedure and DBS
      programming techniques have enabled colleagues from Sweden and Portugal to
      perform surgery and publish their own results of DBS for patients with
      Tourette syndrome [k].
    
ImpactSummary

    The clinical research of the UCL Unit of Functional Neurosurgery has led
      to improvements in the operative technique of Deep Brain Stimulation (DBS)
      with clear and demonstrable impact on patient outcomes with respect to
      efficacy, safety, and adverse event profiles. Our published data have been
      described by an independent editorial as a new "Benchmark for Functional
      Neurosurgery". Our Unit's excellent safety record has led to an
      ever-growing number of referrals, has allowed us to trial DBS for new
      indications, and has prompted visits from a succession of international
      specialists who seek to learn and disseminate our practice in their
      centres.
    
UnderpinningResearch

    There are an estimated 120,000 people affected by Parkinson's disease
      (PD) in the UK. Medication improves the symptoms of PD in the early stages
      but with disease progression, patients develop fluctuations in their
      symptoms, and involuntary movements in response to medication. The motor
      symptoms of PD, as well as the complications of medical treatment for PD,
      can be improved using high-frequency-stimulation delivered to precise
      targets deep within the brain, such as the subthalamic nucleus (STN). This
      technique is known as Deep Brain Stimulation. The placement of electrodes
      requires invasive brain surgery, and therefore must be performed only by
      experienced teams. The major concerns surrounding DBS are intracranial
      haemorrhage, imprecise placement of electrodes, and uncertainty regarding
      the anatomical origin of stimulation-related adverse effects such as
      deterioration in speech and cognition.
    Our group has improved the operative methods used in DBS surgery to
      minimise the number of brain penetrations required to accurately site
      electrodes and thus avoid the inevitable increased risks associated with
      multiple electrode trajectories. This has been achieved by developing
      optimised pre-operative imaging protocols, ensuring that brain-shift
      during surgery is minimised, and that electrodes do not traverse the
      cerebral ventricles en route to their targets, thus enabling electrodes to
      be placed using a completely image-guided and image-verified approach to
      the surgery [1].
    Furthermore we have made improvements to our imaging techniques in order
      to better understand the connectivity of the STN and thus inform on the
      sub-regions of this structure that are involved in motor pathways rather
      than cognitive functions, enabling us to modify the chosen surgical target
      accordingly [2]. Additionally we have used a range of functional
      imaging techniques (both PET and fMRI) to identify which brain regions
      change their activity in response to clinically effective stimulation.
      This has identified the brain networks that are involved in normal
      movement and that are disrupted in PD and opens up further avenues for
      future neuromodulation techniques [3]. Recordings from the brains
      of our patients with their stimulation switched off and on, using a range
      of neuro-physiological tools, have led to discoveries of the details of
      the abnormal brain function that underlies PD, and the mechanisms through
      which DBS can lead to its improvements. These findings are paving the way
      for the development of a closed-loop stimulation device that can detect
      abnormal brain activity and deliver therapeutic stimulation in precise
      spatial and temporal distributions [4]. (This work was done in
      collaboration with Peter Brown, University of Oxford and formerly UCL,
      where much of his early work on this project was completed.)
    We have performed a systematic evaluation of patient outcomes, including
      motor aspects of PD, as well as examining the relationship between DBS and
      speech disturbance using validated methods to document speech
      intelligibility and volume. We have successfully identified important
      aspects of the relationship between electrode position, patient phenotype
      and stimulation-related adverse events (electrodes are now targeted away
      from both the fasciculus cerebellothalamicus and the internal capsule, two
      areas which can both lead to deterioration in speech intelligibility) [5].
      We have confirmed that by applying this summed knowledge, the
      complications of DBS surgery can be avoided, while still providing
      efficacy in terms of motor outcomes as good as, if not better than, any
      other centre worldwide [6].
    