CaseStudyId: 36385
Title: 
    Improvements to quality of life and safety for people with swallowing
      difficulties following analysis of fluid thickeners
    

ImpactDetails

    Our programme of research into thickened drinks used in clinical practice
      has had an influence on commercial products for dysphagia, and on the
      practitioners using these products. Both of these factors have resulted in
      increased benefit for patients with dysphagia.
    Impact on the manufacturers of drink thickeners.
    Our research has been utilised by all three of the companies producing
      thickening products (Fresenius Kabi, Nutricia and Nestl&#233;), both through
      direct use and citation of our research, and via our training of their
      product developers and representatives (for example at the European
      Society for Swallowing Disorders 2012, and BAPEN 2012). These companies
      have utilised our work in the development of new products, in the
      refinement of existing products, in the training of their employees and in
      the training of healthcare providers. In addition it has been used in
      their discussions with NHS staff who procure these products for use in
      individual health trusts. (Every NHS Trust uses these products, and the
      total market value is around &#163;12-15m per annum [a].)
    Fresenius Kabi cite our research throughout an `advertorial' for their
      product, Thick and Easy [b]. This has been used in international
      journals such as Dysphagia, and also the professional magazine from the
      Royal College of Speech and Language Therapists. Fresenius also report
      that the research has been used in product development:
    "The research has also helped us start some new product development
        projects by giving us the improved information around the products
        available in the market" [c].
    Nutricia have also cited one of our papers in an advert for their Nutilis
      range [d]. They report that:
    "The findings from [O'Leary et al 2010] helped Nutricia to develop an
        internal standard for viscosity, which has enabled Nutricia to
        objectively measure viscosity when determining the different stages of
        our dysphagia products (Nutilis Range)... Nutricia have used the
        research from Dr Christina Smith and colleagues to improve the standards
        of the Nutilis range, which is designed to benefit the care of patients
        living with dysphagia" [e].
    The improvements to the thickening products, as described by the
      companies have resulted in a better product used in healthcare. In
      addition, the improvements are reflected in the clarity of their
      advertising.
    Impact on clinical practice through training of healthcare providers.
    As mentioned above, companies have used our work in the training of
      healthcare providers. Many of these companies provide extensive training
      and education to healthcare staff who make thickened drinks for patients.
      Fresenius Kabi, for example, report that:
    "Research at UCL by Dr Christina Smith and colleagues has revealed
        that there are a number of misconceptions around thickening drinks that
        have led to products being misunderstood and potentially affecting
        practice carried out by Speech and Language Therapists. The findings
        have been incorporated into our training sessions to ensure correct
        usage of the products and increased understanding into how liquids and
        thickeners work together allowing health care professionals and patients
        to use our products with better knowledge around the way the product
        works which ultimately improves practice" [c].
    The more carefully this training is provided with increased knowledge of
      the behaviours of the thickening products, the better provision for
      patients.
    We have also directly trained healthcare workers through study days (such
      as the adult dysphagia special interest group in June 2011; the Scottish
      Speech and Language Therapists Special Interest Group in April 2013) and
      practical symposia at conferences (e.g. European Society for Swallowing
      Disorders, October 2012) [f].
    Resulting impacts on patients
    Our research into the behaviours of thickening products providing clearer
      information on the use of these products has influenced the prescribing to
      individuals with swallowing difficulties. For example, a Speech and
      Language Therapist at University Hospital Lewisham reported that the
      hospital had changed their use of the products as a direct result of the
      research [g].
    The international reach of the research is demonstrated the International
      Dysphagia Diet Standardisation Initiative (IDDSI) which is utilising the
      results in setting forth their guidelines.
    
ImpactSummary

    Swallowing disorders (dysphagia) result in prolonged hospital stays and
      can lead to death. An important method in the management of dysphagia is
      the use of fluid thickeners. Fluid thickeners both slow the flow of fluid
      through the oropharynx and increase the sensory input to mediate
      swallowing, thus increasing safety. Research at UCL's Language and
      Communication Research Department has led to improvements in the
      development and standardization of fluid thickeners, the training of
      healthcare workers who prepare them, and increased understanding for
      industry, healthcare and patients. The results are used in the development
      of new commercial thickeners, refinement of current commercial thickeners,
      training industry employees, development of international guidelines for
      dysphagia management, training NHS staff, and prescribing thickeners for
      people with dysphagia.
    
UnderpinningResearch

    Dysphagia is the term used to describe disorders that affect our ability
      to eat, drink and swallow. It is a global disability affecting
      approximately 14% of people over the age of 60 years, 40-78% of people
      post stroke, 20-40% of people with Parkinson's disease, and is found in
      20% of the general elderly primary care population. It also affects
      children, most notably those with cerebral palsy and Down's syndrome. The
      potential problems of choking, chronic aspiration, malnutrition and
      dehydration can be fatal, and have a profound impact on quality of life.
      Persistent swallowing problems add significantly to delay in discharge
      from hospital (adding to NHS costs) with some nursing homes unwilling to
      accept patients who are fed through a nasogastric tube.
    An important technique in the management of swallowing disorders is
      modifying a person's diet by changing the thickness/viscosity of foods and
      drinks through the addition of commercially available powders. Almost all
      individuals with dysphagia will be prescribed a thickening powder, with
      some people using thickeners over many years.
    In the laboratory, Drs Christina Smith and Ben Hanson examined the flow
      behaviours of thickened drinks during their preparation by carers and over
      the time period when drinks may be left for a patient to consume them.
      This work corroborated carers' subjective impressions of continued
      thickening over time and was additionally able to quantify the degree of
      thickening at different times after preparation allowing carers and
      patients to know the thickness of their drinks at different times [1].
    Following on from this research, thickened drinks were prepared using
      instructions provided on the packaging of thickener products and these
      were compared with the terminology provided by the National Descriptors
      developed by professional bodies (Royal College of Speech and Language
      Therapists, British Dietetics Association and National Patient Safety
      Agency). This study clarified for professionals how to prepare drinks
      using thickeners and recommended following product guidelines for
      thickening water rather than using unreliable subjective judgements such
      as visualising the product [2]. As well as publication in academic
      journals, a summary of both papers was also produced for a professional
      magazine to maximise the information dissemination [3].
    Smith and Hanson further demonstrated how thickened drinks change during
      swallowing as a result of salivary amylase, with some thickeners returning
      to their unthickened state [4]. They then went on to propose a
      solution to preserve the thickened drink, thus maximizing patient safety.
      Examining behaviour of the two (starch-based and gum-based) primary groups
      of commercially available thickeners and how they change depending upon
      the base fluid, they demonstrated a 10-fold difference in the thickness
      of a drink (white wine being the thinnest and lemon barley water the
      thickest) with the addition of the same quantity of thickening powder [5].
    The work described above has clear implications for the preparation of
      drinks for people with swallowing difficulties. The research has been used
      by industry in training (Fresenius Medical Care), product description
      (Nutilis and Fresenius Medical Care) and ongoing product development
      Nutilis and Fresenius Medical Care). It has attracted UK research council
      and industry funding. It has altered clinical practice by clarifying for
      industry and clinicians the critical issues in the use of thickeners as a
      therapeutic intervention.
    