CaseStudyId: 36389
Title: 
    Trait Emotional Intelligence Questionnaire (TEIQue): improving outcomes
      in
      business, educational, and other life settings through psychometric
      research
    

ImpactDetails

    Through the course of our research, we have developed new instruments for
      measuring and
      assessing emotional intelligence, which we have re-conceptualised as a set
      of personality traits,
      rather than an IQ-type variable. The Trait Emotional Intelligence
      Questionnaire (TEIQue) has
      converted our scientific research into a practical tool which is now in
      use across a wide range of
      organisations, including businesses and educational establishments. Their
      success is evident in
      the very high volumes of commercial usage and associated financial
      benefits. Trait EI theory and
      the associated range of TEIQue materials are now at the forefront of
      international psychometric
      research yielding concrete and substantial mental health and financial
      benefits.
    Two recent meta-analyses have demonstrated the value of the TEIQue,
      recommending it as a
      measure of choice for medical research, and one that is psychometrically
      superior to other EI
      measures in the literature [a].
    Sales and distribution
    The TEIQue is distributed commercially by Thomas International. (We also
      make it available free of
      charge for academic use.) Distribution of the TEIQue is increasing
      year-on-year, with turnover from
      TEIQue products rising from [text removed for publication] in 2008
      to [text removed for
        publication] for 2013 (totalling [text removed for publication]
      for the whole period) [b].
    Training and dissemination of the TEIQue
    Accreditation in use of the TEIQue is conducted by, among others, the
      training company Ei World,
      who use training materials for the TEIQue under license from Petrides and
      Thomas International.
    The training seminars facilitate scientific applications of the TEIQue
      instruments for purposes of
      coaching, team development, recruitment, succession planning, and talent
      management. The
      company has trained [text removed for publication] in the period
      2008-13, from large corporations,
      the public sector and education, including [text removed for
        publication] [c].
    Use in education
    Our work in educational settings covering academic performance, emotional
      well-being, and self-harm
      informed an intervention at St Benedict's independent school, which sought
      to improve the
      performance and behaviour of underachieving and disruptive students [d].
    One adolescent pupil diagnosed with depression experienced poor
      peer-relations and
      underperformed academically. Feedback on her TEIQue profile enabled her to
      get her concerns
      out into the open and, as a result, to feel happy just to be herself,
      which, in turn, empowered her to
      put maximum effort into her studies. She also observed an improved ability
      to recognize and
      manage her moods, which helped her retain a positive outlook [d].
    The TEIQue was one of three assessments used on a group of Year 10
      pupils. The assistant head
      of the school reported that "The impact of the assessments was huge,
        with a reduction of over 90%
        in external exclusions, internal inclusions, removals from class, and
        negative referrals. Among the
        majority with poor attendance records attendance improved and positive
        referrals increased from
        one in the period prior to the assessments, to 28 after assessment
        feedback had been given" [d].
      Year-end GCSE results increased by 6% and were significantly ahead of
      expectations with
      performance in English and Maths increasing by 10%. In that particular
      application, the TEIQue
      was ranked by the pupils as the most useful of a number of psychological
      instruments employed
      [e].
    Thomas International are now seeking to expand the distribution of the
      TEIQue in education, with a
      new major venture, Thomas Education. This initiative seeks to maximize
      student potential and staff
      performance in secondary schools through the use of a suite of behavioural
      assessments in which
      the TEIQue features prominently [f].
    Impact on businesses and other organisations
    The TEIQue has had a variety of impacts on businesses and other
      organizations in many
      industries. For example, we have systematically investigated in our
      research programme variables
      relating to self-awareness and peer-relations, which was very useful to
      the Doyle Hotel Group as it
      refocused its business strategy from bedrooms to food provision and sought
      to retrain all of its
      Head Chefs with particular emphasis on self-awareness and teamwork [g].
      We have also
      extensively investigated the impact of trait EI on stress, which proved
      especially relevant for BI
      Worldwide in their effort to reduce stress levels among their workforce [h].
    In the Thames Valley police force, an officer well known for his
      autocratic behaviour contemplated
      his TEIQue report, including scores on trait EI facets such as
      Self-motivation, Assertiveness, and
      Relationships, with particular emphasis on the effect they may have on his
      working behaviour. This
      helped him understand how he was being perceived by others. As a result,
      he modified his
      approach and communication style and became easier to work with and more
      successful overall
      [i].
    
ImpactSummary

    The Trait Emotional Intelligence Questionnaire (TEIQue) was developed at
      UCL in 2001 as a
      measurement vehicle for trait emotional intelligence theory by Dr K.V.
      Petrides. It is used by
      businesses and other organisations to improve performance and to develop
      staff. It has helped
      enhance the mental health and wellbeing of numerous individuals through
      behavioural
      improvements, increased self-awareness, and reduced stress. The direct
      financial turnover of
      TEIQue materials from purely commercial usage exceeds [text removed
        for publication] per
      annum. Over 65% of this is generated abroad, representing UK export sales.
    
UnderpinningResearch

    Beginning in the late-1990s, Dr K.V. Petrides, in collaboration with
      Professors Adrian Furnham and
      Norah Frederickson, started investigating the construct of trait emotional
      intelligence (trait EI) and a
      suite of psychometric instruments (the TEIQue) to measure it. Since then,
      this work has expanded
      into a world-leading research programme with considerable penetration in
      `real-world' settings.
    This research has recast emotional intelligence as a constellation of
      personality traits (labelled as
      `trait EI' or alternatively `trait emotional self-efficacy') instead of a
      set of cognitive abilities like IQ.
      This contribution is reflected and expounded in over three dozen
      peer-reviewed publications. An
      important development involved the determination of the key components
      (facets) of trait EI, which
      is technically known as establishing the construct's sampling domain [1].
      These and related
      contributions led to a brand new way of conceptualising the construct with
      significant practical
      implications. One such implication is that high trait EI scores are not
      necessarily desirable and low
      scores are not necessarily undesirable, which has far-reaching
      consequences for personal
      development and leadership feedback [2].
    Research then continued to validate the theory and measures. Petrides (at
      the Institute of
      Education 2002-7, then back at UCL from 2008) collaborated with Furnham
      and Frederickson at
      UCL, Mikolajczak (Louvain), and Sevdalis (Imperial), among others. Key
      findings included data
      demonstrating that trait EI predicts: academic performance and prosocial
      behaviour in vulnerable
      pupils [3]; occupational achievement and organizational commitment
      in employees [4]; self-harming
      in teenagers [5]; and anxiety and worry during the diagnostic
      cancer pathway [6].
    Translational work conducted from 2008 onwards resulted in further
      development of the suite of
      TEIQue instruments [7]. These are being developed and updated in
      the context of translating the
      underlying theory into cutting-edge practical applications with tangible
      positive impact on people's
      lives. The suite includes a number of state-of-the-art psychometric
      instruments, such as full and
      short forms for adults, adolescents, and children as well as full and
      short 360&#176; forms for multi-rater
      assessments. These instruments are supplemented by a range of technical
      and training manuals
      and feedback reports (standard descriptive, developmental, leadership,
      etc.).
    