CaseStudyId: 36382
Title: 
    Cognitive Stimulation Therapy &#8212; a new therapy for dementia
    

ImpactDetails

    CST involves 14 or more sessions of themed activities which aim to
      actively stimulate and engage participants, whilst providing an optimal
      learning environment and the social benefits of a group. CST can be
      administered by any suitably-trained person working with people with
      dementia, such as care workers, occupational therapists or nurses. CST
      groups take place in settings including residential homes, hospitals and
      day centres.
    Dissemination of CST
    Following our development of the CST treatment programme, we have
      facilitated its dissemination through the publication of three training
      manuals [a], and the development of a training programme [b].
      Sales of the manuals in 2008-13 amounted to 5,143 copies [c], and
      in the same period we trained over 2,000 people. Courses took place across
      the UK and in Italy and Spain, including attendees from as far afield as
      Australia and South Africa. In 2010 and 2011 we conducted training
      workshops at Alzheimer's Disease International conferences in Toronto and
      Malaysia, and for the 0/66 international dementia group which organised a
      training workshop in Cuba. We also run a CST website (www.cstdementia.com),
      which has c.8,000 hits per month.
    In 2006, NICE recommended that "people with mild/moderate dementia of all
      types should participate in group Cognitive Stimulation which should be
      commissioned and provided by a range of health and social care workers
      with training and supervision. This should be delivered irrespective of
      any anti-dementia drug received by the person with dementia" [d].
      CST was the only non-drug intervention recommended to treat cognitive
      symptoms of dementia. Our study was referenced as supporting evidence
      which underpinned the decision to recommend CST.
    Use of CST in the UK
    Many people with dementia in the UK and beyond are now benefitting from
      CST. It is routinely offered in many NHS trusts &#8212; for example, in the Isle
      of Wight, our CST protocol has been followed since 2009, with one
      practitioner reporting that "CST is the gold standard because the
        evidence is that it does produce an improvement in people's memory
        scores, and certainly in their quality of life" [e]. The
      following NHS Trusts are known to be offering CST as at July 2013:
      Berkshire; Birmingham and Solihull; Camden and Islington; Cornwall;
      Gloucestershire; Greater Glasgow and Clyde; Isle of Wight; Kent and
      Medway; Milton Keynes; Norfolk and Suffolk; North East London;
      Northamptonshire; Nottinghamshire; Rotherham, Doncaster and South Humber;
      Sussex; South Essex, Tees, Esk and Wear Valley and West London [f].
    CST is also used in other settings such as care homes. For example, the
      London Borough of Redbridge recently implemented CST in 11 care homes
      across the borough [g]. Through use of our manual and training
      courses, it is also possible for individuals to set up groups themselves.
      In an article in the Mail on Sunday in 2011, one carer gives her account
      of setting up a CST group herself, which has now developed into a local
      programme [e, h]
    The impact on the lives of people who undertake such programmes is
      considerable. One patient reported that "I noticed people becoming more
        fluent and you could see people trying to express themselves more."
      Similarly, the positive impacts are valued by carers. One reported that "There
        is no argument that my wife's brighter" and another said "she's
        started remembering things since coming to the group" [i].
      The carer who set up local groups herself concluded that "I want more
        people to have access to CST, which helps people to start living again"
      [e].
    CST is beginning to be recommended more widely in government policy. In
      2011, the NHS Institute for Innovations concluded that CST can save the
      NHS &#163;54.9 million a year through reduced use of antipsychotic medication [j].
      In 2012, the Memory Services National Accreditation Programme (MSNAP) (run
      by the Royal College of Psychiatrists) included CST as one of their key
      standards for accreditation [k]. They now report that as a result,
      CST is used in 66% of memory clinics [l]. Also in 2011, the
      National Clinical Director for Dementia for England drew attention to our
      Cochrane Review, highlighting the positive benefits of CST and its use in
      community, care home and hospital settings [m].
    International impacts
    In 2011, the World Alzheimer's Report stated that CST should routinely be
      given to people with early stage dementia [n]. It advocates using
      CST to provide an effective low cost intervention to help improve
      cognition for people with dementia in developing countries. The CST manual
      has been translated into several languages including Japanese, Spanish,
      Italian, German, Portuguese, Dutch and Swahili. Since 2008 CST is being
      used in Australia, USA, South Africa, New Zealand, Germany, Canada, Chile,
      Italy, Japan, Nepal, the Philippines, the Netherlands, Tanzania, Brazil,
      China, Hong Kong, Indonesia, India, Ireland, Nigeria, Singapore, South
      Korea, Turkey and Portugal [o].
    
ImpactSummary

    Cognitive Stimulation Therapy (CST) is an evidence-based, brief, group
      therapy for people with mild to moderate dementia. It was developed and
      evaluated by UCL in collaboration with Bangor University. Our research
      showed significant benefits in cognition and quality of life plus
      cost-effectiveness. Cognitive Stimulation for people with mild/moderate
      dementia of all types is recommended by NICE and is now in widespread use
      across the UK and the rest of the world in a variety of settings including
      care homes, hospitals and the community. A recent audit by the Memory
      Services National Accreditation Programme reported that 66% of UK memory
      clinics surveyed were using CST.
    
UnderpinningResearch

    Dementia is a common condition that affects about 800,000 people in the
      UK. Our research over the last 15 years has led to the development of an
      evidence-based group therapy for people with dementia, which is now in
      widespread use across the UK and beyond.
    The key underpinning research was a multi-centre, single-blind RCT which
      ran between 1998 and 2001. It was led by Professor Martin Orrell (UCL
      Mental Health Sciences) and Professor Bob Woods (University of Bangor),
      with Dr Aimee Spector being the lead researcher/PhD student (now Senior
      Lecturer in Clinical, Educational &amp; Health Psychology at UCL). It aims
      to improve cognitive skills and quality of life for people with dementia
      through activities such as categorisation, word association and discussion
      of current affairs. The `key principles' of CST seem to be the main
      mechanisms of change &#8212; these include stimulation of language and executive
      functioning, encouraging implicit learning and a focus on opinions rather
      than facts.
    201 participants were randomised to receive CST over 7 weeks, compared to
      a `treatment as usual' control group. There were significant improvements
      in cognition and quality of life following CST. The cognitive benefits
      were of a similar magnitude to those found using anti-dementia drugs [1].
      An economic analysis conducted in collaboration with partners at the
      London School of Economics (LSE) showed CST to be cost-effective [2].
      A pilot study of longer-term CST showed that cognitive function can
      continue to improve for a six-month period using weekly CST sessions
      following from the initial programme [3]. Subsequent analysis of
      the trial data showed that CST benefits memory, language and executive
      functioning in dementia, with the most marked impact on language [4].
      A study using complex neuropsychological tests showed significant changes
      in verbal memory, non-verbal memory, language comprehension and
      orientation [5]. Qualitative interviews with service-users and
      staff showed that changes generalised into everyday life such as
      improvements in mood and concentration [6]. Our recent Cochrane
      review has confirmed the effectiveness of cognitive stimulation approaches
      [7].
    Research into CST has continued at UCL. As part of the NIHR-funded SHIELD
      Programme (led by Orrell) a 26-week maintenance CST programme has been
      evaluated as an RCT, showing continued benefits in quality of life. The
      SHIELD programme is also supporting a trial looking at implementation of
      CST in practice, which is currently underway. The individual CST trial
      (led by Orrell and supported by the Health Technology Assessment grants
      programme), involves the development and evaluation of a one-to-one,
      carer-led CST programme and has just completed recruitment.
    