CaseStudyId: 36396
Title: 
    Improving the management of the psychological consequences of disasters
      and terrorism
    

ImpactDetails

    The research described above has had a direct impact on the way disasters
      and emergencies are
      planned for and responded to, both in the UK and overseas. The trauma
      screening questionnaire
      (TSQ) is used widely around the world. The model developed at UCL was
      first implemented after
      the London bombings in 2005. A later evaluation conducted in the period in
      question (2008-13)
      showed that it had been very successful, and it has since been
      incorporated into government
      guidance, including planning for the Olympics.
    The evaluation of the London Bombings programme funded by the Department
      of Health found
      that 30% of those screened were referred for treatment and, of those
      referred within the
      programme, over 75% completed treatment. The clinical outcomes of this
      group were excellent,
      with more than 80% achieving a clinically significant improvement, and
      were well maintained
      among those followed up after one year [a]. The evaluation also
      identified a number of
      impediments to assisting survivors. These included: data protection
      legislation preventing
      identification of those affected; the failure of referral mechanisms in
      general practice; the need to
      plan for the administration and funding of the mental health response to
      disasters; the need for a
      register of those affected.
    Impacts on policy and planning
    Partly as a result of the concerns raised by the programme, the Cabinet
      Office issued special
      guidance on the use of data protection legislation in emergency situations
      in 2007 [b]. The UCL
      model used in the London bombings has subsequently been explicitly
      recognised in two major
      reports, the first issued by the NATO Joint Medical Committee in 2008 [c]
      and the second by the
      Department of Health Emergency Preparedness Division in 2009 [d].
      These reports endorse the
      UCL screen and treat model, proposing that: (a) immediate intervention is
      restricted to providing
      information, psychosocial support, psychological first aid, and education
      rather than crisis
      counselling; and (b) people who are involved should be followed up to
      detect those who have
      persistent symptoms who can be treated with empirically supported
      interventions.
    The recommendations concerning planning for mental health consequences of
      a major incident
      were incorporated into NHS London major incident plans, including those
      for the 2012 Olympics
      [e]. Another key recommendation, for a central register of affected
      persons after disasters, led to
      the setting up of an implementation committee by the Health Protection
      Agency (HPA) of which
      Professor Brewin was a member. Provisions for the HPA to set up and manage
      a register are now
      in place for future disasters, which will make a very significant
      difference to providing health care
      and conducting epidemiological research [f].
    Use in outreach and screening programmes
    Programmes based on the UCL model have now been successfully implemented
      around the world,
      for example in a US school after a suicide and in the Netherlands [g].
      During the period 2008-13,
      Brewin received 217 direct requests for use of the TSQ from 24 countries.
      The three most frequent
      sources of request were: large scale health organisations such as
      hospitals, community and school
      counselling centres (22%); research psychologists and psychiatrists (21%);
      individual mental
      health professionals and private clinics (19%) [h]. Brewin has
      also provided telephone or in-person
      consultations concerning meeting mental health needs after large-scale
      disasters, for example
      following the 2011 Norway summer camp shootings [i] and the 2010
      Christchurch earthquake [j].
    Twenty-eight governmental and nongovernmental organisations (in various
      countries) concerned
      with mental health issues and/or high risk populations have had the TSQ on
      their websites as a
      mental health education material and self-screening tool. For example,
      Suffolk Mental Health
      Partnership provide a copy of the TSQ and the Cumbria Partnership NHS
      Foundation Trust
      recommended use of the TSQ after the West Cumbria shootings in 2010 [k].
      In the US, the
      Department for Veterans Affairs recommend the TSQ on the website of their
      National Center for
      PTSD [l].
    Use of the TSQ is now part of a standard recommended protocol developed
      for firefighters in the
      US. Firefighter Life Safety Initiative 13 was one of 16 such initiatives
      jointly developed by
      representatives of the major fire service constituencies in 2004. It aimed
      to ensure that "Firefighters
      and their families must have access to counseling and psychological
      support". This was developed
      and promulgated by the National Fallen Firefighters Foundation (NFFF) and
      has since informed the
      emerging safety culture in the US fire service [m]. The initiative
      developed a Protocol for Exposure
      to Occupational Stress which "recommends the use of the Trauma Screen
        Questionnaire as a
        widely accessible tool for individuals to understand if they are in need
        of behavioral assistance." An
      article in Fire Fighter Nation describes a typical example of how one
      service used the TSQ in
      action to assist a firefighter after a traumatic event [n].
    The TSQ has been translated into 8 languages, and has been adapted for
      use in children [o]. It
      has been included in 56 studies, with 32 of them applying it as an
      assessment tool of PTSD
      symptoms, and another 18 using it as a screening instrument of the risk of
      PTSD development.
      Fifteen studies took place in the UK, 11 in the USA, 9 in Australia, 6 in
      the Netherlands, and one
      each in Canada, France, Iceland, India, Republic of Congo, and Republic of
      Georgia.
    
ImpactSummary

    Research at UCL developed a `screen and treat' model for dealing with
      mental health problems in
      the aftermath of disasters. This was successfully implemented after the
      London bombings in 2005.
      The strategy was shown to be very effective in detecting individuals in
      severe psychological need,
      and those screened and referred within the programme benefited
      substantially from evidence-based
      treatment. Since then, the model has been adopted in planning for major
      incidents in the UK
      and abroad. The screening instrument developed at UCL is in widespread use
      around the world.
    
UnderpinningResearch

    In July 1999 Professor Brewin moved to UCL to take up a post as Professor
      of Clinical Psychology,
      jointly funded by HEFCE and the NHS, and formulated a new `screen and
      treat' strategy for mental
      health problems arising from major disasters. Prior to this survivors were
      usually offered
      psychological debriefing, but evidence had accumulated that this was
      ineffective. At the same time
      international research conducted after the Oklahoma City bombing in 1995
      and World Trade
      Center attack in 2001 showed that there was a substantial minority who
      developed serious mental
      health problems such as posttraumatic stress disorder and that their needs
      were likely to go
      unrecognised and untreated [1]. Already by 2000 there was a clear
      lack of any agreement in the
      scientific literature on effective and cost-efficient methods of ensuring
      good mental health
      outcomes for survivors.
    The new strategy was based on an entirely different approach, and
      recommended not intervening
      in the short-term to reduce psychological symptoms unless the person's
      coping resources were
      clearly inadequate. Instead, resources should be devoted to active
      outreach and screening to
      detect the minority of individuals who were failing to make a good
      recovery, and to providing them
      with effective, evidence-based interventions [2].
    An essential prerequisite for implementing the strategy was to develop a
      simple and effective
      screening instrument for detecting posttraumatic stress disorder following
      a wide variety of major
      incidents. A grant was awarded by the NHS Executive in November 1999 after
      the Ladbroke Grove
      rail crash to Professor Brewin as Principal Investigator together with
      colleagues from Royal
      Holloway and Imperial College London. This led to the discovery that a
      simple set of 10 Yes/No
      questions provided excellent screening performance, based on which the
      Trauma Screening
      Questionnaire (TSQ) was developed and validated [3]. A subsequent
      systematic review of
      screening measures for PTSD showed that its psychometric properties were
      as good as and
      generally better than existing measures [4].
    On 5 July 2005, the London bombings seriously affected areas in the
      immediate vicinity of UCL.
      UCL students and staff members were among the injured and killed. Two
      weeks later a
      Psychosocial Steering Group, which included Professor Brewin among its
      membership, was
      convened by the Camden &amp; Islington Mental Health and Social Care Trust
      and the London
      Development Centre for Mental Health. The Steering Group approved
      proposals based on the
      screen and treat model previously described. This was the first example
      internationally of such a
      response being planned from the very beginning of the post-disaster
      period, and funding was
      obtained from the Department of Health. As originally envisaged in the
      article by Brewin (2001),
      most Londoners were resilient [5, 6] but a minority were seriously
      affected. The screening team
      undertook active outreach, identifying survivors and screening them some
      months after the
      bombing with the Trauma Screening Questionnaire. Those screening positive
      were referred for
      evidence-based psychological therapy [1].
    