CaseStudyId: 36406
Title: 
    Development of conditionally immortalised cell lines as novel cell models
      of disease and for cell transplantation
    

ImpactDetails

    1. Establishment of ReNeuron
    The research has led to the establishment of two companies. ReNeuron
      was established in 1997 by Jat's collaborators with &#163;5m in venture capital
      from Sir Chris Evans after licensing the IP [a]. The initial focus
      was to develop stem cell lines for generating new neurons and brain cells
      to reverse damage to brain tissue caused by stroke. Jat was a consultant
      to ReNeuron from 1999 to 2005. ReNeuron is now a &#163;63.5m company (July 2013
      figure), publically traded on the London AIM market. ReNeuron have used
      their cell expansion and screening technologies to develop stem cell
      therapies for conditions such as stroke where there are few alternative
      treatments. Unlike conventional drug treatments that treat symptoms, stem
      cell treatments treat the underlying cause of the disease. The aim is to
      develop cells that can be readily administered "off-the-shelf" to any
      eligible patient without the need for additional drug treatments [b].
    ReNeuron's lead therapeutic candidate is the ReN001 stem cell therapy for
      the treatment of patients left disabled by stroke. ReNeuron are also
      developing stem cell therapies for other conditions such as critical limb
      ischaemia, a serious and common side effect of diabetes, and
      blindness-causing diseases of the retina. Reneuron have also developed a
      range of stem cell lines for non-therapeutic applications &#8212; the ReNcell&#174;
      products for use in academic and commercial research. The ReNcell&#174;CX
      and ReNcell&#174;VM neural cell lines are marketed worldwide under
      license by Merck Millipore (USA).
    ReN001 is currently undergoing the PISCES (Pilot Investigation of Stem
      Cells in Stroke) study. This is the world's first fully regulated clinical
      trial of a neural stem cell therapy for disabled stroke patients. Stroke
      is the third largest cause of death and the single largest cause of adult
      disability in the developed world. The PISCES clinical trial is being
      conducted in Scotland at the Institute of Neurological Sciences, Southern
      General Hospital, Greater Glasgow and Clyde NHS Board. It is a Phase I
      single administration dose escalation safety study, to 12 stroke patients
      disabled by ischaemic stroke, the most common form of the condition. The
      Principal Investigator is Professor Keith Muir, SINAPSE Professor of
      Clinical Imaging, Division of Clinical Neurosciences at the University of
      Glasgow. The aim of this trial is to evaluate the safety of the
      implantation procedure and determine the side effects associated with the
      cell implantation. Patients in the PISCES trial will be followed up over a
      two year period. Monitoring of the patients will continue for longer term
      following the two year end-point. In addition to safety and tolerability
      of ReN001, a number of clinical assessments of the patients will be made
      to evaluate changes in motor and cognitive function. In June 2012, interim
      data from the PISCES study for the first five patients was presented by
      the Glasgow clinical team at the 10th Annual Meeting of the
      International Society for Stem Cell Research (ISSCR) in Yokohama, Japan [c].
      Reductions in neurological impairment and spasticity were observed in all
      five patients compared with their stable pre-treatment baseline
      performance. Remaining patients in the PISCES trail will be treated by
      2013 [d]. ReNeuron have already submitted an application to the UK
      regulatory authority to commence a multi-site Phase II clinical trial to
      examine the efficacy of ReN001 stem cell therapy in patients disabled by
      ischaemic stroke. The aim is to recruit patients between two and four
      months after the stroke.
    2. Establishment of XCellSyz
    XCellSyz was established in 2005 as a spin-out from UCL by Professor
      Peter Shepherd; Jat was on the Scientific Advisory Board. XCellSyz was
      bought by Cambrex and then Lonza AG the current owners [e]. Jat,
      with research support from ReNeuron (1999-2005), developed reagents for
      conditional immortalisation of human cells. Lonza now supply these
      reagents as well as conditionally immortal cells to the worldwide
      scientific community. They describe the benefits of these products as
      follows: "Lonza overcomes [the limitations of immortalized cell lines]
        using a temperature dependent, conditional immortalization approach
        utilizing Large T-Antigen that allows the immortalization to be reversed
        and the cells to revert to their original characteristics. This allows
        development of cell lines from a wide range of human and animal tissues,
        and of novel models relevant to drug discovery based on lines from
        people with particular diseases" [f].
    3. Patents
    More than 20 patents based on Professor Jat's work have been issued, of
      which three are currently active [g].
    
ImpactSummary

    Research by Professor Parmjit Jat (first at the Ludwig Institute for
      Cancer Research, then part of UCL; later at the UCL Institute of
      Neurology) established and applied the critically important scientific
      concept of conditional immortalisation to a wide variety of cell lines,
      enabling cells to be grown indefinitely in vitro but differentiate
      upon altering the growth conditions. Two companies were established in
      partnership with Jat to exploit this research, ReNeuron (now worth &#163;63.5m
      and publicly traded on the London AIM market) and XCellSyz (now part of
      Lonza AG). More than 20 patents based on Professor Jat's work have been
      issued. Reagents based on his research have been evaluated, licensed and
      used by 17 companies worldwide: Amgen, Amylin, Boehringer Mannheim, Cell
      Genesys, Chiron, Eli Lilly, Genentech Inc., Genetics Institute, Immunex,
      Johnson &amp; Johnson, Medarex, Novartis, Ortho Pharm., Pfizer Inc.,
      Regeneron, ReNeuron, Takeda, EMD Serono, and XCellSyZ/Cambrex
      Bioscience/Lonza.
    
UnderpinningResearch

    Professor Parmjit Jat established the critically important concept of
      conditional immortalisation, whereby cells can be grown indefinitely but
      undergo a rapid cessation of growth and differentiate upon altering the
      growth conditions. This enabled him to develop "Immortomouse", a novel H-
      2Kbtsa58 strain of mice that can be used to derive
      conditionally immortal cells from a wide variety of tissues. This was
      patented by the Ludwig Institute for Cancer Research (LIRC) and the
      Medical Research Council (MRC) with Jat as inventor, and has been sold
      worldwide by Charles River Laboratories. Many research groups and
      companies worldwide have subsequently used this approach to develop
      conditionally immortal cell lines that can undergo differentiation.
    Collaborative work between Jat, J Sinden (now Chief Scientific Officer of
      ReNeuron) and JA Gray (originally Institute of Psychiatry, King's College
      London) led to the development of a conditionally immortal, multipotent
      cell line from embryonic day 14 hippocampal neuroepithelium of the H- 2Kbtsa58
      transgenic mouse [1]. These cells can be maintained indefinitely
      and exhibit multipotential differentiation properties in vitro and
      in vivo. Moreover these cells selectively repopulated a lesioned
      CA1 pyramidal layer and restored ischaemia-induced deficits in acquisition
      of a hidden platform location in the Morris water maze.
    These results raised the possibility of successfully developing
      multipotent clonal cell lines that can be used in human graft neurosurgery
      with the capacity to migrate to areas of CNS damage and restore specific
      neurological and cognitive deficits. This was the basis for the
      establishment of ReNeuron with the primary objective of developing novel
      human cell lines for transplantation.
    The demonstration that SV40 large T antigen cooperates with
      reconstitution of telomerase activity to immortalise human cells enabled
      Jat to take an important step forward and develop reagents for the
      conditional immortalisation of human somatic cells. He showed that human
      cells are not immortalised upon reconstitution of telomerase activity
      alone but additional activities are required which can be provided by
      large T antigen [2]. Such immortalised cells remain dependent upon
      large T antigen to maintain their growth; its inactivation results in a
      rapid irreversible growth arrest. Jat further showed that large T antigen
      interacts with Bub1, a spindle assembly checkpoint protein, providing a
      potential explanation for the chromosome aberrations and aneuploidy often
      observed in large T antigen immortalised cells. This enabled him to
      develop a triple mutant of large T antigen that does not interact with
      Bub1, does not bind to DNA and is thermolabile for preparing minimally
      immortalised counterparts of primary human cells [3].
    These reagents have enabled the development of entirely new human cell
      models, for example, breast epithelial cells [4], podocytes [5]
      and kidney tubule epithelial cells from Dent disease patients [6].
    