CaseStudyId: 36402
Title: 
The Phonological Assessment Battery (PhAB) &#8212; improving diagnosis of
dyslexia in children


ImpactDetails

The publication of PhAB had a dramatic impact on assessment practice of educational
psychologists, the lead profession in the UK for assessment and diagnosis of dyslexia. Concern
had been growing about traditional assessment practice which was not evidence based and led to
under-identification of dyslexia in bilingual children. There was increasing awareness about the
importance of phonological skills in dyslexia and PhAB provided, for the first time, a reliable and
well-validated means of assessing these skills with mono-lingual and bilingual children aged 6-15
years. There was widespread adoption of the use of PhAB by educational psychologists to the
benefit of the many children, particularly those from bilingual or socially disadvantaged
backgrounds whose needs the traditional assessment approach failed to identify. Although other
tests of phonological skills have been developed since PhAB, 10 years after its publication it was
authoritatively reviewed as `the best available test of phonological processing with UK norms' [a].
In the period 2008-121, over [text removed for publication] copies of the PhAB were sold. The
total number of record forms sold (in the packs and individually) amounts to [text removed for
publication] record forms. One form is used per child being assessed, thus providing an indication
of the number of children with whom it has been used during this period [b].
The most important impact of PhAB is on the children who have benefited from having their special
needs identified and been able to access appropriate intervention. Undiagnosed dyslexia has been
implicated in low self-esteem, poor school attendance, adjustment problems and criminal
behaviour in adolescence, as well as academic failure which has lifelong consequences. PhAB
provided practitioners with an assessment tool which offered significant advances over previous
approaches because it was focused on the core impairments in most cases of dyslexia and
informed targeted intervention to address the problems identified. It also allowed earlier
identification of problems and, through being made accessible to teachers as well as educational
psychologists, enabled many more children to be reached. A review in a major dyslexia textbook
said: "Both the content of the battery and the clear theoretical rationale that underpins it are
impressive" [c].
From the outset PhAB was designed to be accessible to additionally trained teachers as well as
educational psychologists. This has greatly extended the reach of the battery and served to
maximise the numbers of children who have benefitted from the resource. In the period 2008-10,
55% of sales were made directly to schools [a]. A major recommendation of the 2009 Government
report on identifying and teaching children and young people with dyslexia (the Rose Report)
concerned teacher professional development and the need to devise tailored interventions for
children struggling with literacy, including those with dyslexia. Leading professional development
resources for teachers recommend the use of PhAB for use in assessments of dyslexia from which
tailored interventions will be developed [d, e, f]. One review, published in a journal for practitioners,
said: "The battery is designed for use by EPs, speech and language therapists, support teachers
and SENCOs. My experience of using this battery would suggest that all of these workers could
find this a useful tool, certainly those directly involved in education. On the whole I would
recommend it highly to all the above and will certainly be using it myself on a regular basis" [f].
PhAB has now become firmly embedded in educational policy across the UK and further afield. It is
positively reviewed and/or recommended on the websites of many education authorities in the UK
as well as at a national level in the Republic of Ireland [h]. It is used in at least 126 local authorities
across Great Britain and Northern Ireland and during the period 2008-10 sales were recorded in 34
countries [b]. It is used by specialist centres that regularly assess children for dyslexia and also
train many specialist teachers and assessors each year. For example the Helen Arkell Dyslexia
Centre reported in 2011 "We usually use the PhAB in our assessments when possible and
encourage our trainees to do so as well" [i].
Further corroborating testimony from the Principal Educational Psychologist for the Borough of
Luton (who was a member of the Executive Committee of the National Association of Principal
Educational Psychologists throughout the assessment period, and was Chair 2008-10) says:
"Having been designed from the outset to be accessible to and interpretable by teachers,
PhAB has been a very important tool in the services and support delivered to schools by
educational psychologists and specialist teachers, and in the assessment practice of
special educational needs coordinators in mainstream schools. While other phonological
assessment tools have been published in the UK after PhAB, none of these have been as
well reviewed or as highly regarded by educational psychology practitioners, and none
have enjoyed the widespread implementation by teachers that has been achieved by
PhAB... It is in widespread use by local authority specialist teaching services and special
educational needs coordinators across the UK, and is recommended as an established and
highly regarded assessment tool by educational psychologists [j]."
In November 2010, more than 13 years after its publication, the publisher reported that PhAB
`continues to sell well and be used widely, particularly by specialist teachers and clinical
practitioners.' It was also reported that a major North American publisher was interested in
publishing PhAB for North America. A second edition of PhAB was commissioned in July 2011.

ImpactSummary

Research on impairments in phonological skills underlying developmental dyslexia was
instrumental in producing a major change in assessment practice for children with dyslexia, in
particular for bilingual children who were previously significantly under-diagnosed. The assessment
instrument developed, the Phonological Assessment Battery (PhAB), was the first such measure
available to educational practitioners in the UK. Widely recommended in professional guidance, it
remains the most commonly used phonological instrument by educational psychologists and
teachers nationally. It has been used with nearly 38,000 children around the world in the period
2008-13 and a second edition is currently in preparation.

UnderpinningResearch

A programme of research led by Professor Uta Frith at UCL during the 1990s investigated the
phonological basis of developmental dyslexia, in particular with regard to dyslexia assessment and
bilingual populations [1, 2]. Ground-breaking research with neuroimaging researcher Eraldo
Paulesu (Milan) and developmental psychologist Maggie Snowling (York at that time)
demonstrated that such adults show a distinctive pattern of brain activation when carrying out
phonological tasks [3]. Connectivity between anterior and posterior language areas was found to
be much weaker for them in comparison with matched controls who had shown typical reading
development as children. The discovery of a neurobiological basis for dyslexia impacting on
phonological processing suggested that the different manifestations of dyslexia across different
languages may primarily relate to differences in the challenges for dyslexic learners of differences
in the consistency of their orthographies.
Cross-linguistic studies conducted with Heinz Wimmer and Karin Landerl compared German and
English children, both with dyslexia and typically developing. As predicted, the same underlying
phonological processing deficit was identified in both the English and German dyslexic groups. In
both cases children learning to read in English, the less consistent of the languages, performed
more poorly than the children learning to read in German [4, 5]. This work was extended to Italian
and French speaking and dyslexics. This established a universal neurophysiological basis for the
underlying phonological difficulties in dyslexia while, at the same time, behavioural signs of
dyslexia differed in the 3 languages. Italian dyslexic readers were able to read accurately, if slowly,
but showed the same phonological processing problems as English dyslexics.
The impact of this work, as described in this case study, was crucially dependent in addition on a
programme of translational research that was established alongside Professor Frith's basic
research programme. A Research Seminar Group at UCL met at UCL between September 1992
and July 1995, led by Professor Frith, Professor Norah Frederickson, Director of the Educational
Psychology training programme at UCL (an expert in assessment practice in educational
psychology) and Dr Rea Reason of Manchester University (an educational psychologist with
expertise in teaching children who have dyslexia). An invited group of researchers and
practitioners was assembled with the explicit aim of translating the ongoing programme of research
at UCL into practice. The other members of the Research Seminar group were: Peter Brooks
(Helen Arkell Dyslexia Centre), Tim Bunn (Leicestershire LEA), Tony Cline (Educational
Psychology Group, UCL), Ann Forrester (Tameside LEA), Dr Alison Gallagher (MRC Cognitive
Development Unit, UCL), Simon Gibbs (Cleveland LEA), Dr Andy Miller (University of Nottingham),
Diana Walton (Hackney LEA) and Jo Wilson (Buckinghamshire LEA).
In 1995 a research edition of the Phonological Assessment Battery (PhAB) was produced and an
edition of the practitioner journal Educational and Child Psychology (Volume 12, number 1), guest
edited by Norah Frederickson and Rea Reason and authored by members of the Research
Seminar Group, was devoted to the phonological assessment of dyslexia and the development of
the five subtests which comprise PhAB. The first article by Uta Frith applied the causal modelling
approach of Morton and Frith (then in press in Cicchetti &amp; Cohen), in explaining the basic research
findings and their implications for practice. In parallel to Professor Frith's basic research on
dyslexia in monolinguals and bilinguals, applied research was undertaken on the use of PhAB with
dyslexia and bilingual children, which was incorporated in the manual of the Standardised Edition
of PhAB, which published by NFER-Nelson (now Granada Learning) in 1997, following a national
standardisation by NFER.
