44360

    The Moorfields Regression Analysis improves the management of glaucoma
    


    Glaucoma is known as `the silent thief of sight' because most people with
      glaucoma have no early symptoms or pain. By the time a patient is aware of
      vision loss, the disease is usually quite advanced. Late diagnosis is one
      of the most important risk factors for glaucoma blindness. Left
      undiagnosed and untreated, glaucoma can lead to irreversible blindness. If
      the condition is detected early enough, it is often possible to halt its
      development or delay its progression with medical or surgical treatment [a].
      Diagnostic and monitoring techniques, therefore, play a pivotal role in
      glaucoma management. The research in this case study has contributed to
      the improvement of glaucoma healthcare by providing new diagnostic tools
      and evidence for the required frequency of monitoring the VF.
    The diagnostic and predictive power of the MRA has led to the worldwide
      acceptance that imaging of the ONH should be performed in addition to VF
      monitoring, in order to characterise glaucomatous damage to the eye [b].
      The MRA has also become a `reference standard' for establishing the
      performance of other imaging devices in establishing whether or not
      glaucoma is present [c] and in predicting its development in
      patients with high IOP [d]. The worldwide scale of use of this
      technology is substantial. At Moorfields Eye Hospital, all newly referred
      glaucoma patients are now imaged using the HRT, which means that around
      32,500 patients in this hospital alone have been benefited from this
      technique for the period 2009-2013 [e]. Nationwide and worldwide,
      this number is much higher.
    The pre-eminence of the MRA is further illustrated through its use as the
      technique of choice in glaucoma imaging (scanning laser ophthalmoscopy)
      diagnostics worldwide, with more than 6,500 HRT devices having been sold,
      mostly since the incorporation of the MRA into the device's software in
      1999. For more than 15 years, the MRA has remained a robust indicator of
      structural change, which has contributed to the success of the HRT and its
      adoption by clinicians worldwide. Heidelberg Engineering have confirmed
      that "The inclusion of the Moorfields Regression Analysis developed
        with Professor Garway-Heath has been one of the contributing factors to
        the adoption and success of the HRT within the glaucoma community. MRA
        has become synonymous with HRT and is considered one of the most
        important single tests for the early diagnosis of glaucoma" [f].
    The development of a map that correlates structural findings with
      functional loss is another key achievement in the field of glaucoma
      management. As a result of this research, it is now possible for
      clinicians to understand the link between vision loss and damage to the
      optic nerve that transmits visual information from the eye to the brain.
      The anatomical map known as the `Garway-Heath Map' was developed to help
      establish this correlation and is now used worldwide for the evaluation of
      glaucoma patients and in clinical research in glaucoma and other ocular
      conditions [g]. In the diagnostics industry, it is incoprporated
      into widely-used diagnostic software such as in the Heidelberg Eye
      Explorer [h]. It has recently been incorporated into FORUM
      Glaucoma Workplace (Carl Zeiss) [i], software for the presentation
      of diagnostic test results, allowing clinicians to visualise
      simultaneously functional and structural outcomes of patients. Heidelberg
      Engineering and Carl Zeiss are the market leaders in glaucoma diagnostics
      and the `Garway-Heath map' has become central to the display of the
      diagnostic results.
    The significance of our research and publications on imaging is evident
      from their extensive referencing in European management guidelines [j]
      and their citation as Suggested Reference Texts in American Preferred
      Practice Pattern (PPP) Guidelines [k]. The widespread success of
      the HRT since the incorporation of the MRA into its software has boosted
      research and development in this field. This, in turn, has led to
      widespread use of imaging devices in the clinic as confirmed in the
      European Glaucoma Society (EGS) guidelines [l]. Using our
      publications as the basis for its evidence, the EGS recommends the use of
      imaging in the diagnosis of glaucoma and in monitoring its progression.
      Likewise, the American PPP Guidelines recommend the use of imaging devices
      as diagnostic tools, and recognise their increasing clinical importance [m].
      Our work on imaging has also been used as the basis for evaluating the
      evidence for the use of imaging devices in screening for glaucoma [n].
      Our work on the frequency of VF testing required to identify patients at
      risk of lifetime visual impairment has been used by the EGS in its
      guidelines to recommend the optimal frequency of VF testing in glaucoma
      management [j].
    


    Prevention of blindness caused by glaucoma requires an early diagnosis,
      for which we have developed new clinical techniques. The Moorfields
      Regression Analysis (MRA) is an algorithm that we developed for the
      Heidelberg Retina Tomograph, an imaging device for glaucoma diagnostics.
      The MRA made it possible, for the first time, to accurately quantify
      structural damage caused by glaucoma. The MRA allows earlier diagnosis of
      glaucoma, and has been adopted worldwide.
    


    Research conducted at UCL since 1994 has improved the clinical management
      of glaucoma, a disorder characterised by optic nerve damage and
      progressive visual field (VF) loss. The major risk factor for this
      condition is high intraocular pressure (IOP), and the prevention of
      blindness caused by glaucoma requires an early diagnosis. In glaucoma
      management, both functional and structural examinations are used to
      confirm and monitor the disease.
    For functional examinations, it is fundamental that VF tests are
      conducted to identify vision loss but VF measurements are highly variable
      and, as shown by work done by our group, frequent monitoring is therefore
      needed. In collaboration with Dalhousie University (Halifax, Canada),
      Garway-Heath worked on practical recommendations for measuring the rates
      of VF change in glaucoma [1]. Clear guidance was given to
      clinicians on how many VF tests they need to acquire within a certain
      period of time to identify rapid deterioration of the disease. The work
      was very quickly adopted worldwide and has been widely cited.
    Structural examinations can be performed by examining changes in the
      optic nerve head (ONH), which can be detected by examining the ONH with a
      slit lamp microscope, the most frequently used instrument by
      ophthalmologists, or with high-resolution photography (stereoscopic
      photography). These techniques, however, are subjective and they cannot be
      used to adequately quantify the amount of damage. Because of these
      limitations, structural examinations in glaucoma have not been used
      optimally and glaucoma management has mostly relied on VF testing. The
      introduction of automated imaging techniques laid the foundations for
      objective analysis of the ONH. However, these techniques lacked an
      adequate algorithm to enable the accurate quantification of ONH damage. To
      address this need, Garway-Heath and his team developed the Moorfields
      Regression Analysis (MRA), for one of the earliest and best-established
      imaging devices, the Heidelberg Retina Tomograph (HRT) [2]. The
      HRT measures the amount of neural tissue present in the ONH, which is
      reduced by glaucoma. The MRA enabled the classification of ONH damage and
      revolutionised the use of imaging in the clinical management of glaucoma [3,
        4]. In a recent Europe-wide study, the MRA was validated further: it
      performed better than general ophthalmologists and most glaucoma
      specialists in identifying glaucomatous optic nerves [5].
    It is important that clinicians and researchers appreciate how functional
      and structural defects in glaucoma are related, so that the agreement of
      outputs from different diagnostic test modalities (structural and
      functional) can be assessed. The `Garway-Heath Map' was developed to
      facilitate this understanding and it shows the anatomical relationship
      between VF test points and regions of the ONH. The MRA output classifies
      regions of the optic nerve head as within or outside normal limits; the
      map helps to correlate vision loss with the pattern and extent of damage
      to the optic nerve [6].
    

