CaseStudyId: 20066
Title: 
    Self-management intervention for men with lower urinary tract symptoms:
      development, phased evaluation and global adoption
    

ImpactDetails

    As a result of our work, which provided an evidence base for the efficacy
      of self-management in LUTS, nearly all evidence-based practice guidelines
      recommend self-management as the initial form of therapy for all men
      presenting with LUTS. It has therefore become a global standard of care.
    
      NICE guideline CG97 (2010), on Lower urinary tract symptoms in men,
        recommends self- management in the text and in the therapeutic
        algorithms. The BMJ RCT is referenced [a]. Emberton acted as
        expert advisor to the group that produced the guidelines.
      2011 guidelines issued by the European Association of Urology on
        treatment of non-neurogenic male LUTs (on which the majority of the
        national guidelines are based) cite our evidence that "self-management
          as part of watchful waiting reduces both symptoms and progression".
        Accordingly, they recommend that "men with mild symptoms are
          suitable for watchful waiting...Men with LUTS should be offered
          lifestyle advice prior to or concurrent with treatment." The table
        from Brown et al 2007 is cited directly and the recommendation is
        attributed a level of Evidence of 1b; Grade A [b].
    
    Self-management is now widely recommended to patients, for example on the
      patient.co.uk website [c] and on NHS Choices [d]. Private
      healthcare providers now recommend self- management according to the NICE
      guidelines (e.g. Benenden Healthcare [e]) and it is widely used in
      NHS Continence Services [f]. A survey of GPs in 2011 showed that
      46% had implemented the guidance, and 80% of those had seen a reduction in
      referral costs [g].
    The impacts of our work on patients are as follows:
    
      
Fewer men require drug therapy: our RCT demonstrated both a
        reduction in symptoms equivalent to that achieved by surgery and a
        reduction in the need for treatment whether it be medication or surgery
      
More effective therapy: Our intervention arm was standard care
        plus self-management. Men receiving drug therapy who were randomised to
        the intervention arm had greater and more sustained symptom improvement.
      
Fewer referrals: Self-management is being applied in primary
        care and is being promoted through self-help groups. The resolution of
        symptoms without recourse to medication or surgery leads to fewer
        referrals to secondary care.
    
    The impacts on patients also provide economic benefits to the healthcare
      system through a reduced cost of care. Our work has shown that once the
      self-management skills are taught the benefits are sustained. This has not
      been the case in other self-management programmes. A conservative
      estimate, abstracting from our data, is that men using self-management
      have a 3-fold reduction in risk of requiring therapy or progressing
      symptomatically. Estimates of the cost of treating LUTS in the UK are
      approximately &#163;120m per year. Modelling of the effect size and uptake of
      self-management as an initial strategy produces an estimate of a &#163;20m
      annual saving, largely derived as a result of fewer referrals to secondary
      care and to reduced drug costs.
    Kaiser Permanente, the largest managed care organisation in the United
      States covering a population of 3.6 million, is in the process of adapting
      and implementing self-management as a standard intervention based on the
      work published by our team and the recommendations in international
      clinical practice guidelines. They state that it is "exactly the type
        of innovative, impactful work that can help us break out of the
        traditional means of delivering health care, and help contain burgeoning
        costs while at the same time, improve the quality of care." [h].
    
ImpactSummary

    Lower Urinary Tract Symptoms (LUTS) in men is a chronic disease of ageing
      that causes significant quality of life impairment in one third of men
      over the age of 60. Traditional management comprises a step-up regimen of
      drugs and surgical interventions aimed at relieving symptoms. At UCL we
      conceived, developed, evaluated and implemented a self-management
      intervention that results in greater symptom reduction than that achieved
      by medication, reduction in the use of medication and of referrals to
      secondary care, and reduced costs. The intervention is now a global
      standard of care.
    
UnderpinningResearch

    In about 2003 Emberton observed that many men were adopting informal
      strategies that would allow them to `manage' their symptoms as an
      alternative to pharmacotherapy [1]. These were sometimes learnt by
      trial and error, and at other times they were acquired through the
      informal network of men with symptoms and, very occasionally, taught by a
      growing constituency of continence advisors and nurse specialists. These
      strategies included: fluid management, caffeine avoidance, timed
      toileting, urethral milking, double voiding and bladder re-training. We
      conducted a survey of urologists, nurse practitioners and continence
      advisors to determine the use of these strategies, and the results showed
      that these interventions are indeed advised by many in such circumstances
      [2]. However, there was a wide variation in their use, and no
      supporting evidence base, so we felt that it was necessary to test their
      effectiveness.
    We began by assembling a multi-disciplinary research team (patients,
      urologists, continence advisors, specialist nurses, health services
      researchers and health psychologists) that was representative of the
      expertise necessary to address the research question. A systematic review
      of the literature confirmed that the evidence to support life-style
      modification was either weak or absent. A formal survey of UK practice
      indicated that the use of lifestyle interventions was infrequent but that
      professional groups would be receptive, if they were shown to be effective
      [3]. We conducted a needs assessment (qualitative methods
      comprising semi-structured interviews/surveys) that confirmed an unmet
      need from the patients' perspective and no barriers to adoption from the
      professions or pharmaceutical industry [1]. We defined the
      intervention prospectively using formal consensus methodology (RAND)
      through the process of item generation and item reduction in two rounds of
      scoring. [4]. The defined intervention was piloted in a single
      centre (UCLH). The pilot demonstrated good uptake by patients, adherence
      to the programme and provided a strong preliminary signal of efficacy.
      This pilot informed the design and conduct of an RCT that compared
      standard care to standard care plus the self-management intervention using
      a reduction in patient-reported symptom score as the primary outcome. This
      study demonstrated a reduction in symptoms equivalent to that achieved by
      surgery and a reduction in the need for medical and surgical treatment [5,6].
    