CaseStudyId: 20951
Title: 
    Targeting endothelin in systemic sclerosis &#8212; improved survival in
      pulmonary arterial hypertension (PAH) in systemic sclerosis and licensing
      of the first drug specifically for digital ulcers in systemic sclerosis
    

ImpactDetails

    Our ongoing programme of basic science, translational and clinical
      research has underpinned substantial advances in understanding vascular
      complications of SSc and has directly informed the development of new
      effective therapies. The best example for this is the targeting of
      endothelin receptors. ET-1 is a vasoconstrictor peptide implicated in SSc
      pathogenesis and ERAs have been developed that are now licensed therapies
      for PAH in SSc and also for digital ulcer disease. The latter represents
      the first ever SSc-specific licensing indication.
    Use of ERAs for PAH in SSc
    PAH is a complication that affects about 10% of SSc patients. As a result
      of the research described above, use of ERAs has become standard practice
      in the management of PAH related to connective tissue disease
      (specifically complicating SSc) [a]. Our work specifically defined
      tolerability and efficacy in SSc cases with PAH. The FDA and EMA approvals
      of Bosentan in 2002 were dependent on the BREATHE-1 study to which we
      contributed [b, c]. The use of Bosentan is now recommended in
      European guidelines [d] and our studies provided key evidence used
      in guideline development.
    Worldwide, many thousands of patients have now benefitted from treatment
      with bosentan for PAH. Actelion (the company that markets bosentan)
      reported that in one year alone (2012) 44,000 patients were currently
      receiving the therapy. It is estimated that around a quarter of PAH
      patients have connective tissue disease (see Badesch et al. 2010), so we
      can assume that around 11,000 of these treatments were for SSc patients [e].
    Endothelin antagonism with bosentan in SSc patients with PAH reduces
      death rate by 30%. Thus the average survival for pulmonary arterial
      hypertension in SSc has improved from less than two years to more than
      five years from diagnosis [f]. This can be estimated to have saved
      around 30 lives a year in our cohort of SSc cases and perhaps 150 lives
      per year in the UK [g]. Furthermore, there is an important benefit
      in terms of quality of life and symptom burden as most patients with PAH
      treatment improve their functional class to grade II, representing minor
      breathlessness that allows them to participate in normal activities. This
      benefit was demonstrated by the improvement in the heath transition domain
      of the SF-36 heath status measure in the TRUST clinical trial that our
      centre led [see reference 4 above]. This has been possible due to
      the pivotal work that our centre undertook in defining a role for ET-1 in
      pathogenesis and also in defining benefit in terms of mortality and
      efficacy of ERA.
    Licensing of bosentan for digital ulcer disease
    Digital ulcers are a significant complication of SSc. They are painful,
      and may take between three and 15 months to heal. Secondary infections may
      occur in 50% of cases, and recurring ulcers can be a major source of
      disability, interfering with the patient's daily activities and capacity
      to work. Digital ulcers can also lead to the chronic use of analgesics and
      antibiotics, and sometimes to hospitalisation and surgery (including
      digital amputation) [h]. In May 2007, Bosentan was licensed by the
      European Medicines Agency (EMA) as a preventative treatment to reduce the
      number of new digital ulcers in patients with systemic sclerosis and
      ongoing digital ulcer disease. As well as the research provided above,
      Black and Denton made the presentation to the EMA on the clinical impact
      of digital ulcer disease that underpinned the approval [i].
    Our work defined the patients most likely to benefit from this high cost
      therapy, in order to facilitate targeting of appropriate cases where
      clinical impact and economic considerations are favourable. This treatment
      is now recommended in consensus guidelines issued by the UK Scleroderma
      working group [j].
    European League Against Rheumatism (EULAR) and the EULAR Scleroderma
      Trials and Research Group (EUSTAR) recommend: "Bosentan has confirmed
        efficacy in two high-quality randomised controlled trials to prevent
        digital ulcers in diffuse systemic sclerosis patients, in particular
        those with multiple digital ulcers. Bosentan should be considered in
        diffuse systemic sclerosis with multiple digital ulcers after failure of
        calcium antagonists and, usually, prostanoid therapy" [d].
      In 2012, Actelion (manufacturers of Bosentan) reported that over 5,000 DU
      patients were currently on this therapy [k].
    Trial results showed that the use of bosentan for digital ulcers reduced
      the incidence in SSc patients by 50% [l]. A 50% reduction in new
      digital ulcer formation is a tangible impact on a non- lethal burden of
      SSc that affects up to 50% of cases. It has been shown in recent work from
      the DUO register that ulcer number correlates with inability to undertake
      employed work and also the need for paid help, specifically that having
      more than two digital ulcers is associated with reduced work participation
      [m].
    Reduction in need for hospital admission for intravenous prostcyclin has
      been a specific benefit of the availability of oral therapies for severe
      digital ulcers in SSc. This is exemplified by the approved algorithm for
      ulcer use that defines the need for three or more annual admissions for
      inpatient treatment as a threshold for funding application for ERA. This
      is based upon predicted per patient annual saving of around &#163;3,600. Thus,
      with around 30 cases per year in our centre fulfilling this standard, that
      has now been adopted by UK Scleroderma Study Group (chaired by Denton) as
      part of their "best practice recommendations" in 2012, would save the NHS
      in our hospital an estimated &#163;100,000 and nationally a predicted &#163;500,000
      per year.
    
ImpactSummary

    The research described below has made a major contribution to the
      clinical and preclinical development of endothelin receptor antagonists
      (ERAs) for the treatment of systemic sclerosis (SSc). As a result, ERAs
      are now standard management for pulmonary arterial hypertension related to
      connective tissue disease and specifically complicating SSc. This work has
      also led to the licensing of bosentan (one of the ERAs) for digital ulcer
      disease, a major non-lethal complication of SSc that impacts on quality of
      life, employment status and the major economic cost of SSc management. By
      2012, more than 16,000 patients with SSc had been treated worldwide with
      these therapies, with numbers increasing every year.
    
UnderpinningResearch

    Research conducted by the Centre for Rheumatology &amp; Connective Tissue
      Disease, UCL Division of Medicine, has underpinned the development of
      endothelin receptor antagonists (ERA) as treatment for systemic sclerosis
      (SSc). In 1993 we made the key observation that endothelin-1 (ET-1) in the
      plasma was increased in SSc. Over the following years we published a
      number of seminal papers in the field that delineated the association
      between ET-1 and vasculopathy and fibrosis in SSc [1].
    As a result of this early work, a number of studies took place in
      different centres, building on our original observations, and these led to
      licensing of the first ERA (bosentan) for pulmonary hypertension in
      connective tissue disease. This was founded upon the observation that
      pulmonary arterial hypertension (PAH) in SSc was very similar to
      idiopathic and familial forms of PAH and this led to the inclusion of PAH
      cases associated with connective tissue disease, especially SSc, in trials
      for licensing purposes. The first study, led from North America, looked at
      non-scleroderma associated PAH and was so successful that a further
      clinical trial &#8212; BREATHE-1 &#8212; was fast-tracked. UCL researchers played an
      instrumental role in this study. Leading on from this, we undertook a
      sub-group analysis of both trials, which showed that the scleroderma
      patients had responded as well as others to the treatments &#8212; an
      observation which provided an impetus to develop these therapies for
      scleroderma patients [2]. Following licensing of the drugs, we
      were the first to show that this treatment improved survival [3].
    The second phase of research in this area refined and extended our early
      work, demonstrating the class effect of several drugs, and defining the
      differences between them. Our patients with PAH have been enrolled into
      major studies of bosentan and other ERAs (e.g. ambrisentan, sitaxentan)
      and we have explored differences between these agents in ways that would
      not be possible in commercial trials. We have led the largest recent study
      of SSc-PAH that explored long-term benefit of bosentan on quality of life
      [4]. We defined mortality benefit of ERA therapy using data from
      our cohort and also developed new and better assessment for PAH including
      the first study of the biomarker NT-pro-BNP in PAH-SSc that included
      robust haemodynamics and longitudinal sampling [5].
    Our centre has led on research to extend the use of bosentan for digital
      ulcer disease, another complication of SSc for which there were previously
      no treatments available, or scientific rationale for treatments. Our
      observation that patients taking part in clinical trials seemed to have
      fewer digital ulcers led to a pivotal trial (RAPIDS-1) being set up, which
      we led [6]. Along with a further trial (RAPIDS-2), to which we
      made a significant contribution, this led to the licensing of bosentan for
      digital ulcers &#8212; the first ever drug for the condition, and in fact the
      first ever specific therapy for SSc.
    We have provided academic leadership to the Digital Ulcers Outcome (DUO)
      register of cases recruited across Europe with digital ulcer disease in
      SSc and this is providing a unique resource for academic study of this
      important complication that contributes major morbidity. A positive
      outcome of this work has been better care for digital ulcers in SSc and
      harmonisation of good practice across many major centres in Europe.
    