CaseStudyId: 21477
Title: 
    Combinatorial protein domain hunting to facilitate drug discovery
    

ImpactDetails

    Domainex Ltd was incorporated as a private company in December 2001 to
      exploit the innovative technology of combinatorial domain hunting
      developed in the Savva laboratory for drug discovery purposes. The patent
      protecting this technology has now been granted in Australia, the EU,
      Canada, and Japan, and is pending in the USA. Domainex has received over
      &#163;5m in private investment, contracts and grant funding in the 11 years
      since it was established. The most recent investment round closed in June
      2010 with the raising of around &#163;1.3m from Longbow Capital, The Capital
      Fund (managed by YFM Venture Finance), Bury-Fitzwilliam and from Takeda
      Research Investments [a].
    Domainex was originally set up as a fee-for-service drug discovery
      company and, following an initial investment of &#163;250,000 from the
      Bloomsbury Bioseed Fund, the first company employees were hired in 2002 to
      develop the CDH technology into a process that could be offered
      commercially via this model. Since then a number of medium and large
      biotechnology, agrochemical, and pharmaceutical companies have placed
      contracts of ~&#163;30,000 to &gt;&#163;100,000 for CDH studies; this still forms
      part of Domainex's work and helps fund the in-house drug discovery. By
      2007, contractual milestones with the founder institutions were met, and
      Domainex personnel moved to an incubator lab at the London Bioscience
      Innovation Centre (LBIC) in Camden. A &#163;1m trigger point in the company's
      revenues resulted in the transfer of IP to Domainex, and an accrued
      overheads payment of &#163;78,000 to the host department at Birkbeck [b].
    In 2007, a merger with the chemistry contract research organisation, NCE
      Discovery, greatly expanded the remit of in-house research at Domainex by
      allying the core CDH technology with state-of-the-art medicinal chemistry
      expertise. This enabled the company to initiate internal drug discovery
      programmes with the aim of reaching the lead optimisation stage before
      seeking to partner, or outsource, for toxicology and clinical trials of
      lead molecules. Following the merger, Domainex relocated to the Cambridge
      Science Park. It moved to larger premises on the same site in mid-2011,
      doubling its space, increasing its capacity for in-house medicinal
      chemistry and drug discovery, and enabling it to expand its staff to the
      present size. Late in 2009, Takeda Ventures, Inc., the corporate venture
      arm of Takeda Pharmaceutical Company Limited, took an interest on the
      Domainex board through acquiring an 8% stake during an investment round.
      The company's primary investors are now Longbow Capital and YFM Equity
      Partners; previous funders include The Capital Fund, and founder
      scientists and institutions also remain stakeholders.
    Domainex is now a thriving and successful small biotech company employing
      about 30 people, mainly highly skilled scientists engaged in molecular
      biology, biochemistry, computational and medicinal chemistry. It thus
      makes a significant contribution to the local and national economy. It had
      a turnover of &#163;1.95m for the year ended 30 April 2012, up from &#163;82,000 in
      the year to 30 April 2008 [c].
    Client companies and partners from the period 2008-13 include Ark
      Therapeutics, Syngenta, ICR, and Sigma Aldrich [d]. Domainex was
      also a partner on the EU Framework 6 Spine II Complexes consortium
      2006-2009 [e] and has received grants from public bodies including
      the Technology Strategy Board [f]. One major scientific
      achievement of such collaboration was the structure of a CDH-optimised
      protein kinase in complex with lead compounds from the pharmaceutical
      company UCB [g].
    The in-house drug discovery programme has initially centred on proteins
      that are considered to be useful targets for oncology and
      anti-inflammatory drugs and is now producing candidate compounds. The most
      advanced programme in the pipeline focuses on two closely related kinases,
      TANK-binding kinase 1 (TBK1) and IkappaB kinase epsilon (IKK03b5). This
      has yielded patented inhibitors [h] that are now in the lead
      optimisation stage. Domainex is seeking partners within the pharmaceutical
      industry for the clinical development of these compounds, having raised
      &#163;4m by end August 2013 [i]. The first are expected to be nominated
      as candidate drugs in 2014 and to enter Phase I in 2015. Another patent
      has been filed on the synthetic lethality of TBK1/IKK03b5 inhibitors and
      other oncogenes, which includes the use of these oncogenes as biomarkers
      and in combination therapies. The company also has an active programme
      targeting a number of lysine methyltransferases, enzymes that are involved
      in the epigenetic regulation of gene expression and that are known to play
      a part in cancer development. Inhibitors of these enzymes are currently at
      the lead optimisation stage.
    Domainex has received several accolades both for its innovative
      technology and for its proactive work on promoting collaborations between
      academia and industry. The most recent of these was the 2010 Genesis Life
      Science Innovation and Enterprise Programme Of The Year Award [j].
    
ImpactSummary

    Combinatorial Domain Hunting (CDH) technology is a technique for
      producing fragments of proteins that are soluble and tractable for
      biophysical analysis. It was developed between 1999 and 2008 at Birkbeck
      College, in the laboratory of Dr Renos Savva. This technology was patented
      in 2001 and the biotech company Domainex Ltd was then formed to
      commercialise it. In 2007, Domainex merged with a UCL spinout company, NCE
      Discovery Ltd. The company has attracted over &#163;3m in investment and
      employs about 31 people. In addition to its contract research programme,
      it has developed an in-house drug discovery programme utilising CDH. Early
      in 2012 a patent was filed on a series of inhibitors of the protein
      kinases IKK03b5 and TBK1, which are validated drug targets for cancer and
      inflammation, and the first of these are expected to begin clinical trials
      in 2014.
    
UnderpinningResearch

    Drug discovery programmes rely on the availability of protein targets for
      drugs in pure, soluble forms and in relatively large (gram) quantities.
      There are often difficulties with producing such proteins. Protein
      truncation can overcome these, but limited proteolysis is not always
      applicable and bioinformatics-informed truncation may be inaccurate and
      unsuccessful, or resource-intensive. The technology of combinatorial
      domain hunting (CDH), developed by Renos Savva and his co-workers at
      Birkbeck College (Department of Biological Sciences) between 1999 and
      2008, reliably produces stable, soluble truncated protein fragments
      through exhaustively sampling expression of random fragments of the
      encoding gene [1, 2]. These fragments bind ligands and are
      suitable for structural studies, including X-ray crystallography.
    CDH involves subjecting a sequence of DNA that corresponds to a
      protein-coding gene to an enzymatic process leading to multiple
      double-strand breaks in the DNA, and thence to a pool of randomly
      truncated variants. Fragments of the desired approximate size are selected
      using electrophoresis and cloned to form a library for parallel
      recombinant protein production in E. coli. Detection at various
      stages is via a short peptide fusion tag on every variant, which also
      assists purification. Promising samples are then scrutinised using more
      robust biophysical methods.
    In practice, tens of thousands of gene fragments will be expressed within
      each project, and these will be whittled down within a period of about
      three months to give up to 20 protein fragments that are soluble and
      tractable to further analysis, and that may provide suitable targets for
      downstream drug discovery. These will often cover different parts of the
      original protein, perhaps sampling different domains with different
      binding sites and functionalities, increasing the scope of downstream
      projects to discover small-molecule binders with a range of
      pharmaceutically interesting properties.
    As a proof of principle, CDH was applied to p85a, successfully
      identifying soluble and highly expressed constructs encapsulating all its
      known globular domains, and immediately suitable for downstream
      applications [3]. A valuable extension of combinatorial domain
      hunting, CDH2, enables empirical discovery of stable
      protein-protein core complexes. CDH2 was demonstrated ab
        initio using a previously well-characterized Hsp90/Cdc37 complex [4].
      Without using a priori information, the isolation of stable
      protein-protein complexes, suitable for further analyses was demonstrated.
      This resource-efficient process can provide protein complexes for
      screening of compounds designed to modulate protein-protein interactions,
      thus facilitating novel drug discovery.
    After testing the technology in concept, a patent was filed that also
      covered the later implementation of the technology, CDH2 [5].
      This patented technology led to the spin-out of Domainex Ltd in 2001,
      initially as a contract research company for drug discovery.
    