CaseStudyId: 21739
Title: 
    Sodium channels, pain and analgesia
    

ImpactDetails

    Clinical understanding and diagnosis of pain disorders.
    Through our research, several human pain disorders have been linked to
      mutations in both Nav1.7
      and Nav1.8, leading to an increase in the clinical understanding of these
      disorders and to their
      correct diagnosis. By identifying peripheral ion channel mutations linked
      to painful (and pain-free)
      conditions, we have increased the potential for better diagnosis in this
      patient population. The
      Department of Clinical Neurophysiology at the National Hospital for
      Neurology and Neurosurgery
      (NHNN) receives approximately 100 requests per year for the differential
      diagnostic assessment of
      small fibre neuropathies. This differential diagnostic approach
      increasingly uses sequencing for
      mutations in Nav1.7 and Nav1.8 in cases of idiopathic pain, thus starting
      a new line of diagnostic
      procedure which may help to define useful therapeutic approaches [a].
    Similar diagnostic work, using our findings, also takes place at other
      centres. For example, genetic
      testing in the Netherlands for mutations to Nav1.7 and Nav1.8 has revealed
      that, of patients with
      idiopathic painful neuropathy (which affects up to 5% of the general
      population), ~30% have a
      gain-of-function mutation in Nav1.7 [b] and ~10% have a
      gain-of-function mutation in Nav1.8 [c].
      Researchers involved in this study, which built on the earlier UCL
      research, reported that: "a lot of
        patients with small fiber neuropathy were sent to psychiatrists, or sent
        home, and told, `You have
        pain, but we don't see anything, so there's nothing wrong with you...
        [The new findings offer] a
        recognition that they have a real disease, and that there is something
        causing the disease" [d].
    This year, we showed that two patients with the more rare human pain
      disorder, primary
      erythromelalgia, also have gain-of-function variants of Nav1.7 [e].
    Impacts on the pharmaceutical industry
    The neuropathic pain market is huge, with peak sales of prescribed drugs
      across the seven major
      markets expected to reach $4.1bn by 2019. The major challenge in the pain
      drug market is to
      reduce the side-effects associated with treatment, and our discovery of
      roles for Nav1.7 and
      Nav1.8 in peripheral pain has provided the pharmaceutical industry with
      ideal targets for the
      development of more specific analgesics [f]. Indeed, all major
      pharmaceutical companies now
      have programmes based on these targets, with Nav1.7 being the most
      appealing target because
      our research showed that its loss leads to a pain-free phenotype in man.
    As a result of our work, more than 1,000 patents on new analgesic
      compounds targeting Nav1.7
      and 1.8 are currently held by pharmaceutical companies (522 on Nav1.7 and
      597 on Nav1.8 [g]),
      with many of these compounds now in clinical trials. For example,
      Convergence has developed a
      novel small molecule state-dependent Nav1.7 blocker, CNV1014802, which
      began Phase II trials
      for the treatment of trigeminal neuralgia in 2011 [h]. Similarly,
      Ralfinamide (Newron) and Eladur
      (Durect/King/Pfizer), both Nav1.7 blockers, are undergoing Phase II
      clinical trials for neuropathic
      lower back pain and post-herpetic neuralgia. Ralfinamide and Eladur are
      expected to go to market
      and reach peak year sales of $120m and $198m, respectively, by 2019 [f
        &#8212; see table 47].
    We have provided the pharmaceutical industry with the transgenic mouse
      lines developed in our
      lab, saving significant time and money in the industrial development of
      new analgesic compounds.
      Currently, six licences for our mice are held by pharmaceutical companies
      (including five of the
      major companies; names can be provided confidentially). These have a
      financial impact for UCL:
      with each mouse line worth &#163;50,000, they bring in cumulative income in the
      six-figure range [i].
    Public engagement and media appearances
    Our work on the genetic basis of pain has been featured on various TV
      programmes (e.g. The One
      Show, BBC, 2012; The Human Body, Discovery Channel, 2012) including most
      notably in BBC
      Horizon's The Secret World of Pain, 2011. This went out to an
      audience of 1.96m, and the
      Television and Radio Index for Learning and Teaching (TRILT) listed the
      documentary as number
      four in its weekly record of requested programmes [j].
    Increasing public awareness of the many possible physiological origins of
      pain is extremely
      important because patients with chronic pain are often faced with the
      additional trauma of their
      pain being dismissed as "psychological" (by friends and relatives if not
      doctors) when its
      physiological basis is unclear. The BBC internet forum Ouch! Disability
      Message Board also
      included contributions from people featured in the documentary, including
      Rebecca Key who
      explained that the documentary had sparked enough public interest for a
      seminar to be organised
      by the charity Neurosupport, held in Liverpool on 15 June 2011 [k].
    Similarly, it is an important revelation to many that pain is beneficial
      and to live without it can lead
      to serious physical injury. The documentary has had use in clinical
      practices at the Children's
      Hospital: Dr Konrad Jacobs, Psychologist on the Paediatric Rheumatology
      Team, Oxford
      University Hospitals, noted, "There is a scene in it that I have
        started using clinically with children
        with chronic pain. In this scene (around 4:18) two children explain the
        consequences of not being
        able to feel any pain. This scene can be used to explain that pain can
        fulfil a useful function (but
        unfortunately not in their case)" [l].
    Newspaper coverage also noted the impact of the documentary in changing
      the public's
      understanding of pain. The Metro newspaper noted, "as ever, it's in the
        genes and there's one
        tricky customer that controls our experience of pain. Research into that
        is helping treatment of it
        and our understanding of how it works." A review in the Daily
      Express highlighted, "All this mind-body
        stuff is interesting but what makes it important and therefore good TV
        is the way scientists
        are turning it into useful treatments" [m].
    
ImpactSummary

    More than three million people are in pain at any one time in the UK,
      with inadequate analgesic
      treatment because of side-effects or lack of drug efficacy. By identifying
      roles for the voltage-gated
      sodium channel subtypes Nav1.7 and Nav1.8 in peripheral pain, our research
      has had a significant
      impact on the clinical understanding of human pain disorders and
      on the commercial
        development of selective analgesics with fewer side-effects. We have
      developed and
      disseminated several transgenic mouse lines which are widely used
      by the pharmaceutical
      industry. Through media appearances, we have also increased public
        awareness of the
        physiological basis of pain.
    
UnderpinningResearch

    Starting with the hypothesis that genes which are selectively expressed
      in damage-sensing
      neurons (nociceptors) might play important roles in pain pathways,
      research by Professor John
      Wood's group at UCL (Department of Biology, then Wolfson Institute for
      Biomedical Research) has
      discovered and delineated the involvement of two voltage-gated sodium
      channel subtypes, Nav1.7
      and Nav1.8, in peripheral pain.
    In 1995, Armen Akopian, a Wellcome Trust-funded post-doctoral fellow in
      the lab, used a
      subtractive DNA hybridisation technique to find genes in rat dorsal root
      ganglia that were not
      expressed in heart, liver, cortex or cerebellum. In this way, we
      identified 46 mRNA transcripts that
      were expressed selectively in neonatal rat dorsal root ganglia (DRG) as
      judged by Northern blots
      and in situ hybridization [1]. Both known (e.g.
      peripherin, calcitonin gene-related peptide, myelin
      P0) and novel (e.g. C-protein-like, synuclein-like, villin-like)
      identifiable transcripts were present in
      the library. In terms of analgesia research, the voltage-gated sodium
      channel Nav1.8 (previously
      known as SNS) was an attractive new target. We then used knock-out mouse
      technology to show
      that this channel was important in pain pathways [2,3] and,
      perhaps more importantly, we used the
      promoter region of Nav1.8 to drive the expression of Cre recombinase to
      generate knock-out mice
      that lacked the expression of particular genes only in nociceptive neurons
      [4]. This enabled us to
      home in on a range of interesting and specific analgesic drug targets.
    Using this approach in 2004, Mohammed Nassar, an MRC-funded post-doctoral
      fellow in the lab,
      was the first to show that Nav1.7 is a key molecule in peripheral pain
      pathways in mice [4]. We
      later showed that gain-of-function Nav1.7 mutant channels contribute to
      human pain [5].
      Complementarily, in collaboration with Professor Geoff Woods at Cambridge
      University in 2006,
      we found that hereditary loss of Nav1.7 function (due to three distinct
      homozygous mutations in
      three different families) led to congenital loss of human pain [6].
      Thus, increased Nav1.7 function
      leads to increased human pain, whereas loss of Nav1.7 function abolishes
      human pain.
    These important observations focussed the attention of the pain
      pharmaceutical community on the
      Nav1.7 channel as a useful and specific analgesic drug target. We have now
      deleted Nav1.7 in all
      sensory neurons of mice, which recapitulated the pain-free phenotype of
      human Nav1.7 loss-of-
      function mutants, and identified chemical blockers that are potent
      analgesics in animal models [7].
    