CaseStudyId: 21737
Title: 
    Healing chronic wounds with Nexagon
    

ImpactDetails

    Most acute wounds heal without issue, but as we get older our bodies
      become compromised by poor blood circulation and conditions such as
      diabetes, leading to slower healing. This can result in stalled or
      hard-to-heal chronic wounds or ulcers. Currently about two per cent of the
      Western population develop a chronic leg or foot ulcer, and this figure
      will rise as the population ages and diabetes becomes more prevalent.
      Unfortunately a significant proportion of these chronic wounds fail to
      respond to conventional treatment and result in amputation of the lower
      limb. To date, there have been no effective therapeutic agents available
      to treat these wounds. A key feature of the Nexagon technology is that it
      is able to kick-start the healing of chronic wounds where healing has
      stalled, thus addressing a widespread unmet clinical need.
    Commercial impacts: Coda Therapeutics
    CoDa Therapeutics was founded in 2003 by Becker and Green to develop
      Nexagon technology. In October 2006 CoDa Therapeutics raised $23m in
      series A financing, and with this they completed GMP manufacture and
      toxicity testing. In July 2012 CoDa Therapeutics raised series B funding
      of about $38m for venous leg ulcer and diabetic foot ulcer trials.
    CoDa Therapeutics has 11 Biotech team members in New Zealand, including
      five scientists based at the University of Auckland. There are around
      seven staff members at the San Diego site, from where clinical trials are
      organised [a].
    Thus far there are 11 patents relating to Nexagon at different stages of
      being granted worldwide and two more in preparation [b].
    Compassionate use of Nexagon:
    In 2008, CoDa Therapeutics were given approval for compassionate use of
      Nexagon on an amputee patient with a below-the-knee wound that had not
      healed for 18 months. The patient was scheduled for amputation above the
      knee, but just two treatments with Nexagon, a week apart, triggered
      healing and saved his leg from further amputation.
    Nexagon has also been granted compassionate use approval from the New
      Zealand regulatory authorities for treatment of persistent epithelial
      defects following corneal burns. So far Nexagon treatment has saved the
      eyes of over a dozen people when given for compassionate use [c].
    Orphan drug designation:
    In 2009, CoDa Therapeutics were awarded FDA Orphan Drug designation for
      Nexagon for treatment of persistent epithelial defects (PED) following
      corneal burns. Orphan Drug Designation entitles CoDa to seven years of
      market exclusivity in the treatment of PED patients in the event of market
      approval for this indication [d].
    Results of clinical trials with Nexagon:
    Clinical trials with Nexagon were started in 2008. Nexagon successfully
      completed Phase 1 safety trials for both skin (NCT00736593) and eye
      (NCT00654550) indications. In the Phase 1 trial for skin wounds, Nexagon
      was found to be safe and well-tolerated following administration to 43
      healthy volunteers given punch biopsy wounds. Phase 2 trials are now in
      progress or completed for both skin and eye indications.
    Nexagon has also shown positive results in Phase 2a and 2b clinical
      trials for venous leg ulcers, treated by a topical once-weekly
      application. The 98-patient Phase 2a clinical trial of Nexagon
      (NCT00820196) showed that venous leg ulcers treated with Nexagon healed
      five times faster than the current standard of care, with 31% healing
      completely within four weeks, compared to 6% with the current standard of
      care [e]. One participant in this study, who had suffered from
      debilitating leg ulcers for three years, described this trial as "the
        answer to my prayers... I tried everything possible and this is the only
        thing that worked" [f].
    The 300-patient randomised, vehicle-controlled, double-blind Phase 2b
      trial (NCT01199588) was completed in December 2012 and showed Nexagon was
      both safe, and showed an increase in complete healing of leg ulcers. CoDa
      is preparing a paper describing the results of this trial that will be
      submitted to a peer-reviewed medical journal.
    A Phase 2 double-blind randomised vehicle-controlled clinical trial to
      investigate the safety and clinical effect of Nexagon as a topical
      treatment for subjects with a diabetic foot ulcer (DUNE; NCT01490879) was
      started in July 2012, and expects to enrol 160 patients and complete in
      August 2013.
    Persistent Corneal Epithelial Defects occur following corneal damage,
      particularly burns or chemical damage, when healing of the cornea does not
      occur and eyesight is often lost. An efficacy and safety double-blinded
      study of Nexagon for Persistent Corneal Epithelial Defects (NCT01165450)
      started in November 2011, and is due for completion in October 2014. It is
      being run by Dr B Jeng, University of California, San Francisco and
      expects to enrol 72 patients.
    Media coverage
    Nexagon has received international media coverage due to its wide
      potential importance [g].
    
ImpactSummary

    Professor David Becker and colleagues at UCL's Department of Anatomy (now
      Cell &amp; Developmental Biology) identified the gap junction protein
      Connexin43 (Cx43) to be a new therapeutic target for wound healing. Becker
      then developed NexagonTM, a topically applied antisense gel
      that knocks down Cx43 production, and both accelerates the healing of
      acute wounds as well as stimulating healing in chronic wounds. He
      co-founded a company, CoDa Therapeutics, to develop this technology. The
      company has raised $42m in finance and has completed good manufacturing
      practice (GMP) manufacture, toxicity testing and Phase 1 safety trials for
      both skin and eye indications. It has recently completed both Phase 2a and
      2b clinical trials for venous leg ulcers. Nexagon has been given approval
      for compassionate use on a number of occasions and, in 2009, Nexagon gel
      was granted Orphan Drug Designation by the Food and Drug Administration in
      the US for treatment of persistent epithelial defects of the eye.
    
UnderpinningResearch

    In 1994 David Becker obtained a Royal Society University Research
      Fellowship to investigate gap junction proteins, in collaboration with
      Colin Green (formerly UCL, currently University of Auckland). Initial
      findings of his research showed that the gap junction protein Cx43
      normally down-regulates in wound edge keratinocytes and fibroblasts in the
      first 24 hours after wounding as they become migratory, but it increases
      in blood vessels in and around the wound site as they become inflamed and
      leaky.
    Becker therefore tested the hypothesis that down-regulation of Cx43 would
      accelerate wound healing, and found this to be the case [1, 2].
      Because of the obvious therapeutic relevance, the discoveries were covered
      by a series of patents (listed in Section 5 below) starting in 1999.
    Becker and colleagues developed Nexagon, a topically-applied antisense
      gel that down-regulates Cx43 protein production and by this means
      accelerates the healing of acute wounds, reducing inflammation and scar
      formation.
    Wound healing in diabetic patients is notoriously slow, and Becker and
      colleagues then showed that Cx43 was abnormally up-regulated at the edge
      of wounds in the streptozotocin-diabetic rat model. This abnormal Cx43
      expression is responsible for the failure of wound-edge cells to migrate
      and close the wound. Becker showed that reducing the Cx43 expression using
      Nexagon restored healing rates to normal or better [3].
    Wellcome Trust (Catalyst Biomedica) provided seed funding for proof of
      concept studies with Nexagon (2001-3). Becker and Green then founded CoDa
      Therapeutics (NZ) Ltd in 2003. Three years later (2006) they co-founded
      CoDa Therapeutics, Inc, which is based in San Diego CA. Becker continued
      preclinical studies at UCL in collaboration with CoDa, and found that that
      biopsy samples from a wide variety of human chronic wound samples all have
      a striking over-expression of Cx43 protein over a wide area of the wound
      edge epidermis and dermis, which is likely to contribute to lack of
      migration and healing [4, 6, 7].
    