CaseStudyId: 21738
Title: 
    Improving the diagnosis and understanding of Batten Disease
    

ImpactDetails

    New diagnostic tests
    The impact of our research on diagnosis and clinical management of NCL
      has been global. Laboratories around the world now offer comprehensive
      testing for the NCLs [a]. The diagnostic applications of this work
      include prenatal and pre-implantation diagnosis for prevention, predictive
      testing for pre-symptomatic diagnosis (important as experimental therapies
      become available), as well as the definitive diagnosis of symptomatic
      disease and determination of carrier status for relatives. For patients
      and their families the most significant impact has been the improvement in
      the time taken to reach a definite diagnosis, which had taken several
      years for some families but can now be as short as a few months or even
      weeks.
    UCL now offers diagnostic biochemical tests for CLN1, CLN2, and CLN10
      enzyme analysis and DNA-based mutation tests for CLN1, CLN2, CLN3, CLN5,
      CLN6, CLN7, CLN8 and CLN10. Great Ormond Street Hospital (GOSH) performs
      c.100 gene tests each year, for diagnostic, carrier or prenatal testing,
      and 450 enzyme assays. Pathological examination of skin biopsies using
      electron microscopy has long been offered (now around 100 per year), and
      because of UCL's position at the forefront of genetic discovery this is
      also extended to research cases with international collaboration. Five
      hundred blood tests for vacuolated lymphocytes that are characteristic for
      CLN3 disease, are also performed each year [b].
    New diagnostic algorithms
    The identification of genes and mutations underlying different types of
      NCL has led to diagnostic algorithms being displayed on the NCL Resource
      website [c]. These have been viewed 1,970 times. Mole also offers
      personal consultations on a diagnostic pathway approximately six times per
      year. Algorithms are updated as new genes are discovered, and are also
      published in hard copy. As a result of our work, accurate genetic
      diagnosis now underpins disease nomenclature. This provides the essential
      information required for any clinical therapeutic intervention and ensures
      that families know exactly what their disease is. This new nomenclature is
      also summarised on the NCL Resource website (viewed 1,874 times) and
      published in hard copy.
    NCL Resource
    Since monitoring began in mid-2009, the NCL Resource website has received
      more than 15,000 unique visits from 121 countries. It is a unique resource
      which is used: by families to learn about NCL after a new diagnosis and
      particularly to keep up to date with the development of therapies [d];
      by clinicians to learn how and where to access specialised tests for
      diagnosis, and which ones to request; by researchers to be updated about
      the wider aspects of NCL, recent gene identification and mutation data; by
      other professionals to link to international groups including the UK
      Batten Disease Professional Development Group. The website is also used by
      the media and is often cited in publications, particularly the mutation
      database.
    Expert advice
    Mole is Scientific Advisor to the UK Batten Disease Family Association
      (BDFA) [e]. This lay association represents and supports affected
      families and professionals (medical, social, educational) involved with
      them. Mole advises on the content of leaflets and phone response
      protocols, ensuring accuracy in terms of genetic, diagnostic, or research
      information. She has spoken about her research at many meetings over the
      last ten years. In 2008, Mole organised a meeting at UCL with BDFA
      entitled `From bench to bedside.' This meeting gathered together
      scientists, clinicians, social scientists and nurses to discuss ways of
      speeding the future availability of therapy in the UK. From this, the BDFA
      developed their `top ten priorities' for strategic support of research [f].
    Public Engagement work
    In 2012, Mole organised a two-day conference for families and
      professionals that was integrated with the 13th International
      Conference on Neuronal Ceroid Lipofuscinoses (Batten Disease) [g].
      The scientific conference was co-organised with colleagues from King's
      College London and the Evelina Children's Hospital, and covered all
      aspects of Batten disease research. The public engagement event was
      co-organised with BDFA. Events included: specialised workshops and
      training events; broader workshops on science relevant to Batten Disease
      families, such as on clinical trials or specialist education; a UK
      networking event for different professionals who would otherwise not meet;
      `lay summary sessions' to help families benefit from the research being
      presented. Over 260 people attended overall, including nearly 100 family
      members. One family member commented: "Really like your effort to make
        complicated science available for parents of persons with NCL." Then
      "I must say that today's session for parents in the afternoon was even
        better than yesterday (I now know there is something called a cell :-)).
        We do appreciate these efforts to educate the parents" [h].
    Sara Mole won the UCL Provost's Award for Public Engagement (senior
      staff) 2013 for the integration of science and public involvement at
      NCL2012. She is also a member of the NIHR UCL Hospitals Biomedical
      Research Centre (BRC) Strategy Board as representative for Patient and
      Public Involvement, and especially advice on public engagement, from 2013.
    
ImpactSummary

    Research at UCL into the genetics of neuronal ceroid lipofuscinoses (NCL)
      &#8212; also known as Batten Disease - has had a global impact on the diagnosis
      and understanding of this group of diseases. The identification of genes
      and mutations has led to new diagnostic tests, which inform clinical
      management in terms of expected disease course and choice of the most
      effective drugs; prenatal and pre-implantation diagnoses for prevention
      are also possible. The group has established a new classification of
      diseases according to gene-based nomenclature. Information about all genes
      that underlie NCL has been collated in the NCL Mutation Database, which is
      freely available on the NCL Resource website. The group has also engaged
      closely with professionals and affected families to maximise the reach and
      understanding of research.
    
UnderpinningResearch

    NCL is a rare, progressive, inherited neurodegenerative disease affecting
      all ages, but mainly children. There is visual failure, epilepsy and a
      progressive loss of cognitive and motor functions, leading to premature
      death. The incidence varies across populations and is between 1 in 12,500
      and 1 in 100,000, with approximately 10 new patients diagnosed each year
      in the UK.
    Many of the impacts derive from work that began in the 1990s and
      continues to the present day on the identification of genes that cause NCL
      (1995 to date: genes CLN3, CLN2, CLN4, CLN6, CLN7, CLN8, CLN11, CLN12,
        CLN13, CLN14) and the identification of many mutations in these
      genes that cause both typical and atypical NCL disease [1-5]. This
      has changed perceptions of the some of the NCLs, since some, including the
      most common type (juvenile CLN3 disease, 2008), are mutation-specific
      phenotypes. The methodology used has changed over time, as genetic
      approaches have advanced and technology has changed. The new genetic
      information was continually incorporated into fresh diagnostic algorithms.
      As more genetic details emerged, discussions began in 2009 on the
      nomenclature of the disease, which had been based on age of onset for many
      years, leading to the decision to change to one that was gene-based. A
      patient cohort was audited and the results published in 2012 [6].
    The UCL-hosted and curated NCL Mutation Database was launched in 1998 to
      provide a freely accessible list of identified mutations to aid mutation
      diagnosis of patients, and also carrier and prenatal diagnosis. This was
      later incorporated into an expanded website in 2005 &#8212; the NCL Resource &#8212;
      as it had become clear that there was a need for an unbiased and clear
      summary of research and clinical information for this rare disease for
      both clinical, research, health, social and education professionals,
      industry and families. This established UCL as an international centre for
      NCL and provided a unique resource that is highly valued by the
      international community. The mutation database was significantly upgraded
      again in 2011 and 2012 with the addition of data on all published cases to
      allow better understanding of the genotype-phenotype relationship of NCL,
      and more detailed genomic information (2013). This underlies the continued
      development of diagnostics based on new DNA technologies as well as
      biochemistry. There continues a commitment to understanding the molecular
      basis of the NCL, and work has begun towards gene therapy for the visual
      failure, and the identification of new therapeutic tools for the most
      common NCL, juvenile CLN3 disease.
    Key UCL researchers involved in this work are: Dr Sara E Mole, Reader,
      MRC Laboratory for Molecular Cell Biology (from 1992); Professor Robin
      Ali, Institute of Ophthalmology (from 2011); Dr Nicholas Lench, Director
      NE Thames Regional Genetics Service, Head of GOSH DNA and Cytogenetics
      diagnostic laboratories (from 2011); Professor Simon Heales, Head of
      Chemical Pathology/Director of Newborn Screening at Great Ormond Street
      Hospital and UCL Institute of Child Health (from 2011); Mr Glenn Anderson,
      Clinical Electron Microscopist, Great Ormond Street Hospital for Children
      (from 1993); Dr Jose Bras, Research Fellow, UCL Institute of Neurology
      (from 2010); Dr Rita Guerreiro, Research Fellow, UCL Institute of
      Neurology (from 2010).
    