CaseStudyId: 21768
Title: 
    The use of light-activated antimicrobial agents for the treatment of
    periodontitis, caries and other infectious diseases
    

ImpactDetails

    Our research has resulted in a new treatment for periodontitis,
      Periowave, that provides significant benefits over existing antibiotic
      (and potentially invasive surgical) treatments. The technology we
      developed was licensed to Ondine Biomedical in 1998 for periodontal
      treatment. Over the following eight years, the company undertook a number
      of collaborative projects with the EDI, including sponsoring a clinical
      trial. UCL has received more than &#163;1m in research investment from Ondine
      to develop and evaluate this technology. Licensing income received by UCL
      from the commercialisation of the patents is approximately &#163;0.4m. Further
      income is also anticipated as a consequence of the technology being
      licensed to Ondine for the treatment of caries [a].
    Through this collaboration, Ondine developed the Periowave system. This
      consists of a hand-held light-emitting device and a syringe containing the
      LAAA. A solution of the LAAA is applied to the disease site by a dentist,
      who then irradiates it with light from the athermal laser for 60 seconds.
      The treatment takes only a few minutes overall and is painless and
      stress-free, compared to a long course of antibiotics (up to seven days)
      or repeated scaling of teeth. This reduces concerns of limited patient
      compliance and the risk of adverse side effects of antibiotics and/or
      conventional periodontal treatment [b].
    Periowave has been available commercially in Canada since 2006, and has
      since been licensed in Japan, Hong Kong, Singapore and Mexico. The system
      is currently under review by the Korea Food &amp; Drug Administration. It
      has also been given CE marking by the EC. Six core staff are employed by
      Periowave Dental Technologies in sales and marketing, along with a network
      of distributors in various countries. To date approximately 92,000
      Periowave treatment kits have been bought and used on an estimated 313,000
      patients. Aside from trial data indicating clinical benefit, clinicians
      and patients have attested to its benefits. Comments include:
    "Periowave photodisinfection is a rapid, painless approach to removal
        of the harmful bacteria."
    "Periowave is a painless and stress- free way to control the health of
        my gums."
    "My first Periowave treatment was just great. It was completely
        painless, and it was interesting to hear scientifically what was going
        on. There was absolutely no discomfort. If somebody gave me a choice
        between Periowave and an antibiotic, I would take Periowave&#8482; in a flash.
        No antibiotics!" [c].
    The principles of LAAAs and Periowave have wider impacts on public health
      than periodontitis. One of the main problems confronting medicine in the
      21st century is the increasing prevalence of
      antibiotic-resistant bacteria. This, combined with a shortage of new
      antibiotics under development, means that the ability to treat infectious
      diseases is diminishing. A further impact of our work on LAAAs has thus
      been their adaption for the prevention and/or treatment of other
      infections. Based directly upon the principles of Periowave (see company
      website [d]) Ondine have now developed a system (MRSAidTM)
      for eradication of methicillin-resistant Staphylococcus aureus
      from the nose [e]. A recent study conducted by Vancouver General
      Hospital of 5,000 patients revealed that use of this nasal
      photodisinfection system reduced post-surgical infection by almost 40 per
      cent and saved the hospital $1.3m in costs relating to post-surgical
      infections and re-admissions. The hospital was awarded a prize for
      innovation by the International Consortium for Prevention and Infection
      Control (ICPIC) in Geneva for this work, and have now adopted the system
      into routine clinical practice [f].
    Further applications of the principles of LAAAs are presently being
      investigated for: (i) preventing catheter-associated infections (by
      fabricating catheters from LAAA-containing polymers), (ii) reducing the
      microbial load on hospital surfaces (by coating surfaces with
      LAAA-containing polymers) and (iii) preventing wound infections (using
      dressings containing LAAAs).
    
ImpactSummary

    Periodontitis is a significant public health concern affecting more than
      half of those over 30 years of age. Our research on light-activated
      antimicrobial agents (LAAAs) has resulted in the development of a novel,
      non-invasive therapy that quickly and safely treats periodontitis, thereby
      reducing antibiotic usage. This technology was developed for commercial
      use through a licence agreement with Ondine Biomedical and their
      subsidiary company PDT Inc., as a system called Periowave. Periowave is
      available in Canada, Mexico and South East Asia, has been granted CE
      marking and FDA approval is currently being sought. To date an estimated
      92,000 treatment kits have been sold and 313,000 patients treated. The
      system has now also been adapted for use in hospitals to eradicate MRSA
      from the anterior nares thereby preventing post-surgical infections.
    
UnderpinningResearch

    Since 1993, a research programme on the use of light-activated
      antimicrobial agents (LAAAs) to treat periodontitis, caries and other
      infectious diseases has been undertaken at the UCL Eastman Dental
      Institute (EDI), led by Professor Michael Wilson. LAAAs are drugs that
      have no antimicrobial activity in the dark but are activated by light of
      an appropriate wavelength &#8212; they are intended to supplement or replace the
      use of traditional antibiotics and antiseptics and have the advantage that
      microbes are very unlikely to become resistant to them as the active
      moieties are singlet oxygen and free radicals. Furthermore, unlike
      antibiotics, LAAAs can also inactivate a wide range of bacterial virulence
      factors e.g. enzymes and lipopolysaccharides.
    Initial work in 1995 focused on the potential of the technology to
      prevent and/or treat oral infections. A variety of potential LAAAs were
      screened for their ability to kill the wide range of bacteria involved in
      the aetiology of caries, gingivitis and periodontitis. Potential LAAAs
      included phenothiaziniums, cyanines, porphyrins, chlorins and
      phthalocyanines &#8212; each of these had to be matched with a laser emitting
      light with a wavelength corresponding to the absorbance maximum of the
      LAAA. Target organisms included Streptococcus mutans,
      lactobacilli, Porphyromonas gingivalis and Prevotella
        intermedia. The most promising compounds were then investigated for
      their effectiveness at killing the target organisms under environmental
      conditions similar to those that exist in the oral cavity. Hence, the
      organisms were grown as biofilms (which resemble dental plaques) and the
      effects of the presence of saliva and gingival crevicular fluid on the
      effectiveness of the LAAAs was studied. Optimum parameters (LAAA
      concentration, light dose, light energy density) needed for killing under
      these conditions were established [1, 2].
    Following licensing of our patent to Ondine Biopharma in 1998, EDI
      embarked on a collaborative research programme with the company to develop
      a technology specifically aimed at treating periodontitis &#8212; this was named
      "Periowave". Methylene blue was chosen as the LAAA because of its
      antimicrobial effectiveness and safety profile and this required a laser
      emitting light with a wavelength of 670 nm. Extensive studies were carried
      out to determine the optimal and clinically acceptable parameters
      (concentration of methylene blue, light dose, light energy density)
      required to kill a range of periodontitis-associated organisms grown as
      biofilms in the presence of gingival crevicular fluid. Studies involving
      tissue culture and animals were also carried out to ascertain if the
      optimal parameters for achieving a bactericidal effect would induce damage
      to mammalian tissues. We also demonstrated that LAAAs, unlike antibiotics,
      can inactivate bacterial virulence factors and can down-regulate
      inflammatory processes. This ground-breaking finding means that LAAAs have
      a major advantage over antibiotics in the treatment of infectious diseases
      [3, 4].
    Ondine Biopharma used these findings to develop an appropriate
      LAAA-containing formulation and to design a hand-held light delivery
      system suitable for use by dentists. Laboratory and studies were
      undertaken at EDI to confirm the effectiveness of the device for clinical
      application, and this has been confirmed in further trials in the US,
      Canada and China [5]. Work is now underway to extend the use of
      LAAAs in other clinical areas, for example for use in hospitals to reduce
      the environmental load of pathogens thereby helping to prevent
      hospital-acquired infections [6].
    