CaseStudyId: 21767
Title: 
    BioVex: UCL spin-out company develops viral cancer therapy to phase III
      trial and is sold for $1bn
    

ImpactDetails

    The company, initially known as NeuroVex, was spun out from UCL with
      initial funding from Sir Chris Evans, one of the UK's foremost
      biotechnology entrepreneurs. It was incorporated as a private company in
      1999, initially based at UCL with three employees. Two UK patents were
      granted to Latchman and Coffin in 2001, one for mutated herpes simplex
      viruses and their uses (CN1310765) and the other for the cell lines in
      which these viruses are propagated (CN1321199) [a]. Shortly after
      NeuroVex was founded, it changed focus to the development of HSV as an
      "oncolytic" virus therapy for solid tumours. At the same time, it entered
      into an agreement for Wyeth (now part of Pfizer) to continue developing
      HSV as a vector for delivery to the nervous system [b].
    Deleting the HSV protein ICP34.5 produces a virus that will replicate
      rapidly in rapidly dividing tumour cells but not in normal cells,
      eventually causing the cancer cells to burst (lyse). The company, renamed
      BioVex, developed an oncolytic ICP34.5-deleted virus that expressed the
      granulocyte macrophage colony-stimulating factor (GM-CSF) in infected
      tumour cells and released it from those cells when they were lysed so
      targeting multiple tumours elsewhere. This virus, OncoVEXGM-CSF,
      must be delivered by injection directly at the site of the tumour, so skin
      cancers seemed most appropriate for initial clinical tests. A Phase I
      clinical trial of this virus in thirty UK patients with advanced melanoma
      or skin metastases from other solid tumours showed it to be safe and well
      tolerated, and suggested an optimum dose [c].
    By the time the Phase I results were released, BioVex employed about
      20-25 people, many being highly skilled scientists. Most were based in
      Oxford, but the company retained its links with UCL; all animal work was
      carried out there, and they sponsored several PhD studentships at UCL,
      thus contributing to the training of the next generation of UK
      researchers. The board, however, took the decision to move to Boston in
      the US before a Phase II trial, as there were better opportunities for an
      expanding company there. By 2009, it had grown to 75 employees [d].
    An international Phase II trial in 50 patients with melanoma showed that
      the virus was able to induce both local and site-specific anti-tumour
      responses [e]. These promising results led the giant US
      biotechnology company Amgen to approach BioVex with a view to a buyout,
      and the acquisition deal went through in January 2011 [f]. Amgen's
      purchase of BioVex for $1 billion is still the largest sale of a biotech
      company of UK origin in cash terms. The Deal magazine described
      the buyout as "likely to be lauded as the industry's best value play of
        the year" and its lead product, OncoVEXGM-CSF, as "potentially
        revolutionary" [g]. An article on FT.com stated "The deal
        represents one of the biggest exits of a venture capital-backed
        biotechnology company for many years and is a boost for the ailing
        European venture capital industry which has struggled with a dearth of
        big success stories" [h]. Just as remarkably, between the
      launch of the company in 1999 and its purchase by Amgen it had attracted
      over $130m of venture capital funding from a number of investors,
      including $70m in Boston in 2009: the second largest venture capital raise
      by a biotech company in that year [i]. In the remaining 10 months
      of 2011 after the sale, BioVex reported a turnover of &#163;4.6m and an
      operating profit of &#163;154,000 [j]
    Amgen has taken OncoVEXGM-CSF, renamed talimogene
      laherparepvec, into Phase III clinical trials in melanoma [k]. A
      total of 439 patients from 83 study locations in the US, Canada, the UK
      and South Africa were randomised to receive either the vaccine or the
      protein GM-CSF. This is the immune stimulant that is released by tumour
      cells infected with OncoVEXGM-CSF when they are lysed. Large
      Phase III clinical trials like this one always have a significant economic
      impact in the regions where they recruit patients, particularly with the
      creation and/or maintenance of highly skilled jobs in medicine and
      administration. Full results of the trial are expected to be reported in
      2014.
    Interim results from this trial presented at a meeting of the American
      Society of Clinical Oncology (ASCO) in Chicago in June 2013 showed that it
      had met a primary endpoint of a durable response rate that is
      statistically longer in the vaccine arm than the GM-CSF (control) arm, and
      that there were early indications that the vaccine arm will also show an
      increase in overall survival [l]. In an interview with Forbes
      magazine, Amgen's former research chief Roger Perlmutter highlighted
      research at BioVex and in particular the work of Latchman's colleague and
      prot&#233;g&#233; Rob Coffin in developing this promising novel therapy [m].
    
ImpactSummary

    UCL spin-out company BioVex was launched in 1999 to exploit research
      undertaken by David Latchman at the UCL Medical Molecular Biology Unit,
      Department of Biochemistry. (This department is now part of the Department
      of Structural and Molecular Biology, UCL/Birkbeck and Latchman is now
      Master of Birkbeck.) Biovex worked to develop inactivated herpes simplex
      viruses as therapies, and a promising dual-action oncolytic vaccine for
      solid tumours, OncoVEXGM-CSF, was taken into successful Phase
      II trials. In 2011 the company was bought out by Amgen for $1 billion &#8212;
      still the largest ever cash sale of a UK biotech &#8212; and Amgen has now taken
      this virus into a Phase III trial with promising initial results.
    
UnderpinningResearch

    Gene therapy, or the delivery of therapeutic DNA into human cells, is
      showing promise in many disease areas, but the problem of how to deliver
      the DNA into the relevant cells remains difficult. Viruses, which have
      evolved efficient DNA transport mechanisms, have proved to be effective
      vectors although often with serious safety concerns. In particular, it is
      clearly only possible to use pathogenic viruses in this way if they have
      been attenuated &#8212; that is, if their own genetic material has been altered
      so they are no longer effective pathogens.
    David Latchman began work on the adaptation of herpes simplex virus 1
      (HSV1) as a vector for gene therapy in 1993. This work was based on an
      observation (initially by Moira Brown in Glasgow) that this virus, which
      normally causes cold sores, can be "disabled" by the inactivation of one
      or more genes so that it only replicates in dividing cells. Latchman
      initially focused on developing a viral vector for diseases affecting the
      nervous system, since neurons do not divide. This work was published in a
      series of papers from 1996 to 2001.
    Herpes viruses that lack the protein ICP34.5 are not virulent in the
      mammalian nervous system. Latchman and his group first showed that viruses
      in which either this protein alone, or this protein and the virion
      transactivator protein VMW65, had been inactivated, could deliver genes to
      cardiac and vascular muscle cells in culture [1] and to CNS and
      peripheral mouse neurons in vivo; they remained latent and expressed a
      reporter protein in neurons with few side effects [2]. These
      results showed proof of principle for the use of HSV deletion mutants as
      gene therapy vectors. Later work showed that double mutant viruses lacking
      two proteins, ICP27 and ICP34.5, could deliver genes to the CNS more
      efficiently and safely than those lacking ICP34.5 alone [3].
      Introducing further mutations into the viruses allowed the delivery of
      multiple genes [4] and further manipulation increased the length
      of time that the genes could be delivered for [5].
    In 1999 Latchman and his senior post-doc, Rob Coffin, founded a company
      initially called NeuroVex to build on these discoveries and develop gene
      therapies based on inactivated herpes viruses. The company then turned its
      focus to oncology, based on the principle that these viruses will divide
      in, and hence lyse, rapidly dividing cancer cells. The company, renamed
      BioVex, thrived first at UCL and then at laboratories based in Oxford.
      Scientists there developed an oncolytic inactivated herpes virus vector,
      OncoVEXGM-CSF, which has a dual action against cancer cells: it
      divides inside the cells and lyses them, releasing human granulocyte
      macrophage colony-stimulating factor (GM-CSF) which stimulates the host
      immune system to attack remaining cancer cells. BioVex took the drug
      through a successful Phase I clinical trial before moving to the US for
      the Phase II. In 2011, the company was bought by pharma giant Amgen, and
      Amgen has now reported very promising results from an initial Phase III
      trial of this product.
    