CaseStudyId: 21967
Title: 
    Critical evaluation of evidence in medicine and epidemiology: impacts on
      higher education, the NHS and public understanding of science
    

ImpactDetails

    1) Closing university courses in alternative therapies
    The principles behind alternative therapies, such as reflexology and
      homeopathy, are not derived from scientific experimentation and analysis.
      Consequently, their teaching is neither scientifically informative nor
      clinically relevant. There are severe disadvantages to allowing
      universities to offer degrees in these subjects, including: (i) the
      representation of these subjects as science; (ii) the effect of promoting
      these therapies as forms of medicine; (iii) the increased number of
      "qualified" individuals who believe in &#8212; and profit from &#8212; these
      non-medical and sometimes dangerous treatments; and (iv) government
      spending on useless degrees.
    Through critical investigation of these degree courses, drawing on his
      knowledge of pharmacology and statistics, Colquhoun produced strong
      evidence-based arguments to the Information Commissioner and an
      Information Tribunal against the virtues of offering BSc and masters
      courses in these topics. This effort, documented on his blog and reported
      in the media [A.i-v], led to the widespread closure of such
      courses in universities across the UK. In 2012, the Telegraph reported:
    "The number of bachelor and masters degrees in subjects such as
        reflexology, aromatherapy, acupuncture and homoeopathy has halved since
        2007, from more than 40 to 21. Many of the surviving courses are under
        review."
    "The closures are partly the result of a campaign led by Dr David
        Colquhoun, professor of pharmacology at University College London..."
    Degrees in naturopathy, reflexology and aromatherapy have now all
      vanished from Britain's universities. It is encouraging that prospective
      students now appear to be returning to "traditional" degrees such as
      physics and chemistry [A.vi]. Thus, it is already clear that the
      closure of university courses in alternative therapies is benefitting
      education. The stricter policy on what subjects should be taught at degree
      level means funding can be spent on more important areas of education.
    2) Maintaining accurate NHS guidance on alternative therapies
    The effectiveness of alternative therapies, such as homeopathy,
      chiropractic and acupuncture, is not supported by evidence [B.i-iii].
      At best, these therapies simply do not work beyond a placebo effect, and
      their use in place of evidence-based medicine can therefore damage
      patients' health while incurring unnecessary financial costs. For these
      therapies to be portrayed to the general public as a serious treatment
      option is economically damaging and clinically counter-productive.
    The Department of Health was therefore considered to have "failed the
      general public" (David Mattin, ex-NHS Choices editor) when, in 2012, it
      prevented accurate information about homeopathy from appearing on the NHS
      Choices website. Specifically, a new page on homeopathy appeared,
      replacing the previous statement that "homeopathy is not part of
      mainstream medicine". The new page lent unjustified credibility to
      homeopathy and, as documented on his blog and in the media, Colquhoun
      campaigned heavily for the restoration of accurate information [C.i-iii].
      The campaign was quickly successful, with the NHS Choices website now
      clearly stating:
    "A 2010 House of Commons Science and Technology Committee report on
        homeopathy said that homeopathic remedies perform no better than
        placebos, and that the principles on which homeopathy is based are
        'scientifically implausible'. This is also the view of the Chief Medical
        Officer, Professor Dame Sally Davies." [C.iv]
    A similar story is emerging around the NICE guidelines for low back pain,
      which currently recommend manual therapy (including chiropractic) and
      acupuncture &#8212; techniques which are now thought to be ineffective [B.ii-iii].
      NICE received a huge backlash from the medical and scientific community,
      which has been documented and further publicised by Colquhoun [D.i-iii].
      This effort contributed to persuading NICE to reconsider its back pain
      guidance (in progress now).
    3) What constitutes evidence? Impact on public awareness
    Colquhoun's blog also encourages the public to critically assess evidence
      that is presented to them. This is an important skill in a media culture,
      where scientific findings are inflated and oversimplified for the sake of
      a headline. For instance, in 2008, the Telegraph told us that a "Sausage a
      day can increase bowel cancer risk". This headline was based on a 2007
      report from the World Cancer Research Fund and, although the
      epidemiological research within the report was performed well, the
      conclusions were arguably too strong given the evidence. By explaining the
      concepts of causality, randomisation and statistical significance,
      Colquhoun's blog posts on the subject over five years have done more than
      simply point out where the media have gone wrong: they arm readers with
      the tools they need to evaluate this type of evidence themselves [E.i-iii].
    Colquhoun has written 367 blog posts which have generated 6,941 comments
      (all figures in this paragraph to end July 2013). He almost always replies
      to comments, maintaining an interactive relationship with the public, both
      on his blog and in newspapers. The most read post is "Acupuncture is a
      theatrical placebo: the end of a myth" (ref B.iii above), with over 21,000
      page loads so far. The blog has had 3.3 million hits to date
      (605,000 in the last year), and there have been hits from almost every
      country in the world. The blog was featured on the Times 100 best blogs
      list in 2009 [F.i]. The number of page loads per day rarely falls
      below 1,000, but straight after a new post it rises to 3-7,000 hits per
      day. Colquhoun's appearances in the media (see H below) vastly increase
      interest in his blog. The record number of hits on one day was 24,305,
      which occurred on 21 April 2013, the day that The Observer published an
      article naming Colquhoun as a Rational Hero [F.ii].
    As a result of the blog's popularity, Colquhoun has been invited to make
      many media appearances and write newspaper articles [G], which, in
      turn, encourage a wider blog readership. He also has over 8,000 followers
      on Twitter (@david_colquhoun). This medium provides a rather different,
      and highly interactive, audience for public engagement compared with the
      blog.
    
ImpactSummary

    Professor of Pharmacology David Colquhoun's extensive work on receptor
      mechanisms and ion channel function has armed him with the
      pharmacological, statistical, and analytical skills essential to the
      sophisticated evaluation of evidence in the medical sciences. Over the
      past ten years, he has applied these skills to assess the validity of
      public policies, especially on the use of alternative therapies as
      clinical treatments. Having built up evidence-based arguments that
      alternative therapies, such as homeopathy and reflexology, are ineffective
      at best and dangerous at worst, he was able to achieve the nation-wide
      closure of university courses in these subjects. He has also ensured that
      the homeopathy information available on the NHS Choices website is not
      misleading. Through his widely read blog, DC's Improbable Science,
      Colquhoun educates the public in skills of evidence evaluation.
    
UnderpinningResearch

    David Colquhoun has spent his life studying the mechanisms of how drugs
      act on receptors, making several key contributions to the field during his
      41 years at UCL. His early theoretical work with the statistician Alan G.
      Hawkes, and experimental work with Bert Sakmann, led to the first solution
      of the classical pharmacological problem of measuring separately the
      affinity and efficacy of an agonist [1]. In 1996, drawing on the
      earlier work of Hawkes and Jalali, Colquhoun and Hawkes were able to
      obtain the distributions of apparent open and shut times (with exact
      allowance for missed events) of single-ion channels, which were necessary
      to apply the existing theory of single channel behaviour to experimental
      data recorded by apparatus that is incapable of detecting the shortest ion
      channel events [2]. The application of maximum likelihood fitting
      in this paper has been the basis of subsequent experimental work, and the
      distributions of apparent open and shut times are often referred to as HJC
      (Hawkes, Jalali, Colquhoun) distributions [3]. In working with
      Hawkes, Colquhoun developed great expertise in statistics, even writing a
      book on it (Lectures on Biostatistics by David Colquhoun, published
      by Oxford University Press). This statistical knowledge is critical for
      the proper analysis of all types of data, and allows Colquhoun to assess
      the results of anything from clinical trials to epidemiological studies,
      with a trained eye.
    Colquhoun has applied the theory of Markov processes to ion channel
      dynamics to characterise several features of ion channel behaviour, such
      as open times, shut times, latency and length of activation, in response
      to a pulse of agonist concentration or voltage [4]. Colquhoun's
      application of probability theory in his work on ion channels has informed
      his thinking about seemingly unrelated topics. For example, in 2009, he
      applied Markov queuing theory to hospital bed occupancy, explaining to the
      general public why some queues for NHS beds are unavoidable and not
      necessarily indicative of insufficient resources or bad management [5].
    In 2008, in collaboration with Lucia Sivilotti at UCL, Colquhoun
      uncovered the mechanistic reason for why partial agonists never evoke as
      large a response as full agonists, despite binding to as many receptors [6].
      They found that the response of nicotinic receptors to partial agonists is
      limited by an early conformational change in the receptor that takes place
      before the channel opens, debunking the existing theory that a
      difference in the open-shut transition is responsible for the different
      effects of partial and full agonists. This discovery is likely to
      influence the design of partial agonists for therapeutic use. Colquhoun's
      lifelong research into the way that drugs interact with receptors thus
      gives him unique expertise in assessing the proposed pharmacological
      effects of alternative medicines, such as those used in homeopathy.
    