CaseStudyId: 21968
Title: 
    Evaluating and introducing pneumococcal conjugate vaccines (PCV) into the
      UK infant immunisation programme
    

ImpactDetails

    Streptococcus Pneumoniae is an important cause of infection at the
      extremes of life. In the United Kingdom the incidence of invasive
      pneumococcal disease (IPD) is 37-48 per 100,000 for children under 1 year
      and 21-36 per 100,000 for adults &gt;65 years. In the period July 1996 to
      June 2006 (prior to vaccine introduction) there were 52,579 cases of IPD
      identified through the UK laboratory- based surveillance system. This does
      not take into account the majority of pneumonia and otitis media cases [a].
    The first pneumococcal conjugate vaccine containing seven of the most
      prevalent serotypes (PCV7) was licensed in 2000 as a four-dose schedule.
      Adding a new vaccine to the relatively crowded UK infant immunisation
      schedule in the early 2000s presented significant difficulties, as infants
      were already receiving two injections at each immunisation visit (at 2, 3
      and 4 months of age). Our demonstration that three doses were
      immunologically broadly equivalent to four gave the Department of Health
      the evidence base to introduce PCV into the routine infant immunisation
      programme vaccine with doses at 2, 4 and 12 months ("2+1" schedule). An
      initial catch-up campaign was conducted in 2006/7 with routine
      immunisation beginning in 2008 [b].
    The introduction of PCV in the UK has had a clear impact on pneumococcal
      disease. Prior to its introduction, deaths from IPD in children under five
      had peaked at 797 cases/year. In 2011/12 (the last year for which there
      are complete data) this had reduced by 50% to 340 deaths. Notably, cases
      of IPD due to the seven serotypes included in the vaccine have fallen
      dramatically, as the following table shows:
     Table 1: Serotype specific IPD cases for under fives in England and Wales
      prior to and following the introduction of PCV7 into the infant
      immunisation programme [c]
    
      
        
          Serotype
          2003/4
          2011/12
        
        
          4
          15
          0
        
        
          6B
          52
          1
        
        
          9V
          31
          1
        
        
          14
          142
          2
        
        
          18C
          38
          4
        
        
          19F
          49
          5
        
        
          23F
          25
          1
        
      
    
    On the basis of early experience with PCV7, Goldblatt worked with
      international colleagues to define the first correlates of protection and
      then helped to draw up WHO guidelines for how PCVs should be subsequently
      licensed (WHO TRS 927) [d]. These guidelines were used to license
      10- and 13-valent formulations approved in 2009/10. In 2010 the 13-valent
      vaccine was introduced in the UK. This vaccine addressed the burden of
      disease caused by the additional serotypes included in the PCV13 vaccine.
    In addition to the direct impact of the vaccine on disease in the
      vaccinated infants, the PCV vaccine reduces the carriage of pneumococci in
      the nasopharynx, which thus reduces the spread of the pneumococci and
      impacts on invasive disease in other age groups. The figure below (adapted
      from HPA data [c]) illustrates the impact of infant vaccination on
      vaccine type IPD in all age groups in the UK.
	  
	  
	  
    The "2+1" schedule has been highly efficacious and is also more cost
      effective, as it uses fewer doses. For these reasons, many countries
      worldwide have implemented it. In 2013, WHO reports that in Europe and the
      Americas 23 countries are using PCV according to the schedule we developed
      [e].
    Our work has also contributed to global efforts to reduce mortality from
      pneumococcal disease in developing countries. Half a million children
      under five die each year from the condition, making it the leading
      vaccine-preventable cause of death among young children. In response to
      this issue, WHO and the GAVI alliance have initiated an innovative
      financing process &#8212; the Advanced Market Commitment (AMC) [f] &#8212;
      designed to make effective and affordable pneumococcal vaccines available
      for children in developing countries. Goldblatt chaired the committee that
      defined the minimum product specification (TPP) for the vaccine. This
      report was published in February 2008 [g] and in March 2010,
      UNICEF entered into agreements with GSK and Pfizer to supply 30 million
      doses annually for 10 years [h]. An independent report into the
      AMC process reported that: "Several interviewees praised the TPP for
        striking an appropriate balance between setting a high bar to ensure
        vaccine effectiveness and still allowing low-cost producers to compete.
        The TPP also proved useful in inspiring and supporting similar guidance
        for other prospective vaccines" [i]. Since 2010, over 25
      countries have begun to roll out pneumococcal vaccines under this
      programme; by July 2013, it was estimated that GAVI and its partners have
      immunised more than 10 million children [j]. GAVI aims to increase
      this to 45 countries by 2015, projecting that this will prevent more than
      half a million deaths in this period.
    
ImpactSummary

    A programme of work undertaken jointly between the UCL Institute of Child
      Health (ICH) Vaccine Evaluation Laboratory headed by Professor David
      Goldblatt and the Health Protection Agency (now Public Health England
      [PHE]) led by Professor Liz Miller, has led directly to the introduction
      of pneumococcal conjugate vaccines (PCV) into the UK infant immunisation
      schedule. These vaccines have reduced the burden of invasive disease in
      the UK saving many lives and reducing morbidity from these devastating
      infections. This work has also provided the evidence for other countries
      to introduce PCV with fewer than the originally recommended doses, thus
      improving cost effectiveness and hastening the implementation of these
      vaccines worldwide. Goldblatt has also contributed to a WHO programme to
      roll out PCV in developing countries; by July 2013 this programme had
      vaccinated around 10 million children.
    
UnderpinningResearch

    Since 1993, the Goldblatt laboratory has had a leading role in global
      efforts aimed at establishing and standardising pneumococcal assays for
      the purpose of assessing and licensing pneumococcal vaccines [1].
    In 2002 the laboratory was designated one of only two World Health
      Organisation (WHO) Reference Laboratories for Pneumococcal Serology in
      recognition of its role in standardising pneumococcal assays and
      establishing correlates of protection to license second generation
      pneumococcal conjugate vaccines [2]. The WHO funded the laboratory
      to develop assays, teach and train staff from organisations around the
      world in the conduct of such assays and to transfer materials and
      technology to other laboratories to facilitate global efforts to rapidly
      introduce pneumococcal vaccines in areas of the world most in need. The
      laboratory has just finished leading an international effort to develop a
      new Pneumococcal Standard Reference serum to replace the dwindling stocks
      of an existing standard. The new Standard will enable assays to be
      quality-controlled for the next 50 years [3].
    The first PCV, a seven-valent formulation, was licensed in 2000 but
      initially only used in the USA where it was administered, according to a
      four-dose schedule. In collaboration with PHE, we were the first in the
      world to formally assess the utility of a three-dose, rather than the
      licensed four-dose schedule and to predict the efficacy of the reduced
      schedule based on the data generated in this study [4]. A
      three-dose schedule was desirable in the UK to facilitate introduction
      into an already crowded immunisation programme and to address the issue of
      cost-effectiveness. The results of this study led directly to the decision
      in the UK to introduce PCV into the infant immunisation schedule with only
      three doses (September 2006).
    ICH and PHE subsequently proceeded to establish the immunological basis
      for the effectiveness of the response to a three-dose schedule and to
      refine the understanding of pneumococcal correlates of protection [5].
    Underpinning research at ICH continues to inform the evolving use of PCV.
      The Goldblatt laboratory has led a study of PCV administration with the
      first dose at birth, to assess safety and likely efficacy of early
      vaccination in developing countries where up to a quarter of pneumococcal
      deaths under the age of 2 years occur before infants are eligible for
      their first vaccine [6].
    