CaseStudyId: 21963
Title: 
    Enhancing public awareness and engagement with evolutionary cell biology
    

ImpactDetails

    Through the publication of three books, written for a non-specialist
      audience, and through an extensive schedule of public engagement work,
      Lane has enhanced public awareness of relatively little known areas of
      science (evolutionary biochemistry and cell biology) stimulating
      discussion and debate in a wide range of media.
    During the period 2008-13, sales figures for these books were around
      100,000 copies. Since 2008, Lane's books have been translated into 20
      languages, including Japanese and Chinese. Power, Sex and Suicide
      has sold 13,200 copies in Japan alone in the five years since its launch
      in translation at the end of December 2007 [a].
    Lane's books have been reviewed in many high-circulation newspapers and
      magazines. For example, Life Ascending was selected as a book of
      the year by The Times (2010), The Independent (2010) and New
        Scientist (2009) and won the Royal Society Prize for Science Books
      in 2010 [b]. It has also been recommended for use in school by the
      website Science in Schools [c]. Lane's books have received
      thousands of 5-star ratings and reviews online on Amazon, GoodReads [d],
      LibraryThing etc.; they have been recommended by book clubs (e.g.
      Scientific American Book Club) and on reading lists for the public (e.g.
      the US National Center for Science Education [e]).
    Impact on the study of science
    Admissions tutors at UCL report that 50% of students applying to read
      biology or biochemistry at UCL cite Lane's books as inspiration on their
      UCAS forms or at interview [f]. That this inspiration goes beyond
      UCL is supported by the fact that Lane's books are recommended on reading
      lists at universities including Oxford and Cambridge, and are regularly
      recommended in online student forums such as The Student Room [g].
      Lane's student seminars often pack lecture theatres, and generate return
      invitations, a record being four invited lectures to the Oxford University
      Scientific Society. Lane is regularly invited to give talks in schools,
      including Henrietta Barnett, St Paul's, and Haberdasher's Aske's, to caf&#233;s
      scientifiques, and the University of the Third Age [h]. These
      talks directly present the ideas from the research to a non-specialist
      audience. All these activities help draw students into studying biology
      and biochemistry at university.
    Media engagement
    Lane has appeared as an expert in a number of television and radio shows,
      bringing the little-known world of cells and evolution to large audiences.
      On TV he appeared on the BBC2/Discovery documentary Secret Universe:
        The Hidden Life of the Cell (October 2012), a one hour television
      special for BBC 2 and Discovery US that uniquely explored the latest
      understanding of human cellular biology through the dramatic arc of an
      adenovirus invasion. The film (initially aired in the UK, America and
      France) has been watched by about four million people worldwide, was
      received to great critical acclaim, and is now routinely viewed as part of
      A-level biology courses [i]. Lane also acted as scientific adviser
      to the major BBC series Wonders of Life (2013), with Brian Cox.
      The producers have stated "Without doubt, Nick's input and influence on
        the series had a significant impact. Each episode drew an audience reach
        of well over 3.5 million people on television. Hundreds of thousands
        more watched on iPlayer...Some of the topics that we discussed have also
        influenced thinking in the wider Science Department of the BBC" [j].
    Lane has appeared on many radio shows, again with audiences numbering
      millions, including the Today Programme (February 2010), The World
        Tonight (October 2010) and The Infinite Monkey Cage
      (December 2011, June 2013) [k], as well as popular radio shows in
      the US, such as NPR's All Things Considered (Feb 2010). He
      featured on the BBC Radio 4 programme In Our Time (on cells,
      September 2012), with an audience of over two million in the UK, and
      downloads in 40 countries, about which the producer said "The
        programme...is used widely as a teaching aid in schools and universities
        in both the UK and abroad...each episode is a permanent &#8212; and free &#8212;
        learning resource. ...Nick's contribution was crucial in ensuring
        that...complex ideas were communicated clearly while retaining full
        scientific rigour, and his specialist knowledge in the field ensured
        that our account of the subject was both approachable and authoritative".
      [l]
    Public engagement.
    Lane is regularly invited to give public talks at literature and science
      festivals, museums, schools and universities, frequently attracting
      capacity audiences. These include talks and debates at the Edinburgh
      Festival (August 2009), British Science Festival (September 2010),
      Wellcome Trust (September 2010, April 2011) and Natural History Museum
      (November 2011) [h]. His lectures on YouTube have attracted tens
      of thousands of views (his mini lecture `The Origins of Complex Life' on
      the UCLTV channel is the second most popular lecture of 29 with over
      16,000 views) [m]. His feature articles for New Scientist
      and occasional guest blogs for newspapers such as The Times
      attract hundreds of comments per article [n]; features on the
      origin of life and the evolution of complexity were among the most
      commented pieces for New Scientist. Blogs and tweets about Lane's
      academic and media work have also attracted significant attention and
      wider debate, notably the blogs Panda's Thumb [o], Not
        Exactly Rocket Science, The Loom and Pharyngula. He
      has also taken part in debates and discussions on podcasts such as The
        Guardian Science Weekly (January 2010).
    
ImpactSummary

    Through the publication of three books based on his original research,
      written for a non-specialist audience, and through an extensive schedule
      of public engagement work, Dr Nick Lane (UCL Department of Genetics,
      Evolution and Environment) has enhanced public awareness of relatively
      little known areas of science (evolutionary biochemistry and cell
      biology), stimulating discussion and debate in a wide range of media. His
      books have been translated into 20 languages and have sold around 100,000
      copies since 2008. They have had significant societal impacts, such as
      inspiring young people to study biological sciences, raising public
      awareness of research being undertaken in this field and stimulating
      debate and interest in the subject area.
    
UnderpinningResearch

    Lane's research is on the role of bioenergetics in cell evolution,
      especially the origin of life and the evolution of complex cells. These
      ideas, while seemingly remote in terms of deep time, have striking
      implications for the physiology and health of humans, which Lane has
      brought to the fore in research terms through his research. All of this
      work was performed while at UCL, from around 2000 as an Honorary Reader,
      and more recently (2009) as Provost's Venture Research Fellow and, since
      2012, as a member of Faculty.
    Lane has published three books that lay out his original, testable
      framework for understanding the four billion year-sweep of evolution - a
      grand interpretation of evidence in the tradition of Darwin's Origin
        of Species and more recent books such as Maynard Smith and
      Szathmary's Major Transitions of Evolution. Lane's books
      themselves are recognised internationally as original contributions to
      research, and have received hundreds of academic citations.
    In 2002, he published Oxygen: The Molecule that Made the World,
      an account of the strange effects of oxygen on the evolution process,
      particularly concepts of mortality and our place in nature [1].
      The Sunday Times (Books of the Year, 2002) described this book as "an
      extraordinary orchestration of disparate scientific disciplines,
      connecting the origins of life on earth with disease, age and death in
      human beings."
    In 2005, this was followed by Power, Sex, Suicide: Mitochondria and
        the Meaning of Life, a book which set out many of Lane's original
      ideas on the role of mitochondria in the evolution of complex cells, and
      how that affects our health today [2]. A review in Nature
      described this book as "audacious... parts of it qualify as primary
      literature, by announcing at least two major, original and testable
      hypotheses." The Economist (Books of the Year 2005) described it as "full
      of startling insights into the nature and evolution of life as we know
      it". It was shortlisted for the Times Higher Education's Young Academic
      Author of the Year in 2005 and the Royal Society Prize for Science Books
      in 2006.
    Then in 2009, Life Ascending: The Ten Great Inventions of Evolution
      was published [3]. This covered evolution more broadly, from a
      biochemical point of view, and won the Royal Society Prize for Science
      Books in 2010. The journal Science commented that "Lane is that
      particularly rare breed: a scientist who can not only offer a birds-eye
      view of an entire field but also tell you about his own very interesting
      ideas."
    In the years following publication of the books, Lane has formally tested
      their hypotheses through a serious of theoretical papers, along with
      mathematical modelling of population genetic traits, and experimental work
      on the role of energy at the origin of life, currently funded by the
      Leverhulme Trust [4-7]. He has taken a sweeping bioenergetic view
      of evolution, which places the interactions between genes and energy at
      the heart of natural selection, postulating in testable terms why the
      complex eukaryotic cell arose only once in four billion years of
      evolution; and why all eukaryotic organisms (plants, animals, fungi,
      algae, etc.) share numerous counter-intuitive traits that are not seen in
      simpler cells such as bacteria, notably sex, two sexes, speciation and
      senescence. These ideas have potentially critical implications for human
      health issues, including infertility and age-related diseases [6],
      which form the basis for future experimental and genetic work. A
      remarkable aspect of the bioenergetic focus of Lane's work is that a
      central set of ideas gives insights ranging from the origin of life to
      ageing and death.
    