CaseStudyId: 22020
Title: 
    Translating epidemiological evidence on social inequalities to support
      the pensions industry.
    

ImpactDetails

    Population ageing is a key social issue of our times. Not only do we need
      to understand the factors which have contributed to increasing longevity
      and how these may evolve; we also need to understand social differentials
      in patterns and trends to inform policy making.
    The immediate beneficiary of our research is the pensions provider Legal
      &amp; General (L&amp;G). L&amp;G provides retirement income to some
      250,000 customers and has recently received several high- profile
      financial services industry awards, including: Best Life Assurance, Term
      Assurance, Protection and Critical Illness Provider, 2011 &#8212; Financial
      Advisor Life and Pension Awards; 4* winner in life and pensions category,
      2011 - FT Adviser Service awards. The research has implications for the
      valuation of pensions across social groups e.g. public sector final salary
      schemes, occupational (defined contribution) schemes and privately funded
      pensions.
    One of the important ways we support L&amp;G is to translate published
      epidemiological evidence to meet their specific information needs in a
      practical way. Through engagement with UCL and DAHR seminars, L&amp;G have
      also had the opportunity to hear `first-hand' discussions on the changing
      needs, and matters relating to the provision of healthcare in the UK,
      especially in relation to major chronic diseases now and in the future. We
      also contribute to joint monthly seminars between UCL and L&amp;G analysts
      to enable mutual knowledge transfer and capacity building. We have
      disseminated findings in discipline-relevant media and in industry forums:
      seminars, journals and magazines. A key outcome of the academic-industry
      collaboration is to achieve a collective view on the future evolution of
      health and longevity and to spur the development of a range of insurance
      and annuity products that are fair, affordable and could improve the
      quality of life of all in retirement
    L&amp;G report that direct benefits to them include:
    [text removed for publication] [a].
    Reputational benefits of the research to L&amp;G are not easily
      measureable. One measure of impact is that the lead UCL researcher
      (Bajekal) is an invited member of the Institute and Faculty of Actuaries
      Mortality Research Steering Committee and contributed a features article
      to the profession's premier trade journal `The Actuary' (see below).
    All of the UCL/L&amp;G research outputs are in the public domain, so the
      programme contributes indirect benefits to the pensions industry more
      widely. By filling the gap in public availability of socially segmented
      longevity risk analyses, including their epidemiological drivers via the
      medium of peer-reviewed publications, the pension industry gains by having
      an externally acknowledged benchmark against which to align company
      specific client portfolios and to project future trajectories based on a
      better understanding of the reasons for past differentials and the likely
      direction of travel.
    Bajekal was invited to serve on the Institute and Faculty of Actuaries
      Mortality Research Steering Committee (MRSC) in Feb 2012. Since then, she
      has organised a thought leadership seminar [b] and presented a
      paper at the Institute's sessional research meeting [c]. She
      continues to be active in the profession's research strand and is on the
      scientific organising committee for the MRSC's bi-annual 2-day conference
      in September 2014.
    The research also has a wider impact on social and health policy &#8212; for
      example, our research has been used by the ONS in their Statistical
      Bulletin on Avoidable mortality in England and Wales, 2011 [d].
    
ImpactSummary

    Our research has used epidemiological insights, data and methods to
      enable Legal &amp; General (L&amp;G), a major pensions and annuity
      provider, to understand the drivers of long-term trends in the annual
      rates of improvement in mortality in older ages. Our first-ever analysis
      of inequalities in mortality trends by cause of death over 25 years in
      England, and future projections of these, has resulted in better informed
      pricing and risk management (capital reserving) practices at L&amp;G. We
      also modelled how much of the decline in coronary heart disease, the main
      contributor to improving life expectancy, was due to improved healthcare
      versus healthier lifestyles. Projections of these, based on plausible
      scenarios of evolution of risk factors and disease management, helped
      strengthen the evidence base for L&amp;G's assumptions of mortality
      improvements for the UK financial regulators.
    
UnderpinningResearch

    Since 2006, researchers at UCL's Department of Applied Health Research
      (DAHR), have led a programme funded by Legal &amp; General, one of
      Britain's top FTSE 100 companies and a major pension provider in the UK
      insurance industry. The programme was set up to apply UCL's expertise in
      the field of social epidemiology to key questions underpinning mortality
      and longevity risk which are of interest to the UK actuarial profession.
      The overarching aims are: to analyse social inequalities in health and
      mortality risk in older age, between groups and over time; to identify the
      underlying drivers of longevity change; and to project future trends.
    The Principal Investigators for this collaboration are Mr Joseph Lu at
      L&amp;G and at UCL Professor Rosalind Raine. Dr Madhavi Bajekal and Dr
      Shaun Scholes (both L&amp;G employees and honorary staff at UCL, and based
      at UCL) are the key researchers.
    Over the four years to April 2013, we have focused on three streams of
      work:
    Firstly, we used a policy model developed by Professor Capewell
      (Liverpool University) and extended in collaboration with him and his team
      to examine whether the social gradient in the differential falls
      in coronary heart disease (CHD) mortality in the UK were mostly due to
      improved healthcare treatments or to healthier lifestyles. We quantified
      the relative contributions of seven risk factors and approximately 50
      medical therapies to the CHD mortality fall from 2000 to 2007 and the
      variations between socio-economic groups. This research is now complete,
      and key published papers are listed below [1, 2, 3]. To run this
      model, we assembled a unique database from sources including population
      health surveys, GP records, hospital admissions, specialist clinical
      audits, and mortality statistics &#8212; all of which were uniformly coded at
      the individual level to a deprivation index based on an individual's
      postcode of residence. This dataset will continue to be vital in the next
      phase of research from 2014.
    Secondly, we compiled deprivation-coded mortality data from the Office of
      National Statistics (ONS) for each year from 1981 onwards to address key
      questions relating to long-term historical trends in rates of mortality
      improvements among people over 50 years old, by age, gender and
      socio-economic group. Such analyses had not previously been conducted for
      the UK; the closest is the linked-mortality analysis of participants in
      the ONS's Longitudinal Study &#8212; a one per cent sample of census records for
      individuals in England and Wales, linked between successive censuses since
      1971. However, results from the latter are available only once every
      decade, and are indicative rather than conclusive due to the small sample
      sizes at older ages, particularly when segmented by social position, age
      and gender. Our mortality analyses included the following:
    a) age, period and cohort effects in rates of mortality improvement for
      different social groups. The results were presented at the Institute and
      Faculty of Actuaries (IFoA) and published in the industry's leading
      peer-reviewed journal, the British Actuarial Journal (BAJ) [4]
    b) Cause of death decomposition of the differences in life expectancy at
      age 50 between social groups and over time. Presentation at the IFoA
      conference, Sept 2011 [5]
    c) Gender differentials in life expectancy at older ages: are
      differentials converging over time at the same pace across social groups?
      What factors are contributing to the observed convergence over time? These
      analyses are in support of the EU Gender Directive, adopted across the UK
      in December 2012 [6].
    Thirdly, we have provided epidemiological intelligence and support to
      L&amp;G. Demographers, epidemiologists and actuaries often approach the
      same question &#8212; e.g. longevity &#8212; in very different ways resulting in a gap
      of integrated knowledge across the spectrum. For example: there are
      numerous studies, replicated across several countries and cohorts, which
      show that marital status in old age is a strong predictor of longevity.
      But confusingly, the statistical methods used and effect sizes vary widely
      between studies. In such instances where good evidence exists, rather than
      carry out fresh analyses, we evaluated the evidence and converted these
      into practical `best estimates' suitable for actuaries to use in longevity
      models, e.g. as a rating factor.
    To supplement our in-house expertise, we have actively built academic
      collaborations across multi- disciplinary teams (e.g. with Liverpool
      University for clinical epidemiology and policy modelling; Leeds
      University and Max Planck Institute for demographic modelling; CASS for
      actuarial forecasting).
    