CaseStudyId: 22418
Title: 
    CHER trial leads to changes in international guidelines on when to start
      HIV- infected infants on antiretroviral therapy
    

ImpactDetails

    HIV-infected infants are at high risk of disease progression and death.
      But initiating them on lifelong antiretroviral therapy (ART) is
      problematic because:
    
      it is a lifelong commitment
      it costs money
      the drugs can have side effects
      the earlier infants start treatment the more time there is for
        resistance to develop.
    
    Until 2008, national and international guidelines recommended initiation
      of antiretroviral therapy on the basis of a low CD4 percentage or count, a
      high viral load, or the presence of clinical symptoms, whereas the
      treatment of asymptomatic infants with high CD4 values was not mandated.
    The early results of CHER were released at the 4th
      International AIDS Society Conference on Pathogenesis, Treatment and
      Prevention in July 2007. In response to these results, a number of key
      national and international guidelines were changed.
    In February 2008 US national guidelines were changed to recommend
      immediate treatment of HIV-infected infants [a].
    WHO held a meeting in April 2008 to look at the evidence from CHER in
      relation to their guidelines, and launched new interim guidelines in June
      2008, recommending immediate treatment of HIV- infected infants. These
      were then incorporated into the full guidelines when they were revised in
      2010 [b].
    The Paediatric European Network for Treatment of AIDS (PENTA) changed
      their guidelines to recommend immediate treatment of HIV-infected infants
      in November 2008 [c].
    WHO guidelines are very influential for national HIV policy, particularly
      in African countries, where most HIV-positive infants live. A survey of
      national HIV policymakers, carried out in 2008, found that WHO was an
      important and frequent source of information to inform HIV policymaking in
      Africa [d]. Therefore the incorporation of recommendations from
      the CHER trial into WHO policy has had a knock-on effect on national
      guidelines in Africa. Following the changes to WHO guidance, individual
      countries began to follow suit by changing their national guidelines. For
      example, in South Africa the Essential Drug List Committee approved the
      recommendation in November 2008, and it was included in the national
      guidelines issued in December 2010, following the costing study [e].
      The Malawi Ministry of Health updated their guidelines in April 2008 [f],
      and the Uganda Ministry of Health updated their guidelines in June 2009 on
      when to start infants on treatment [g].
    National guidelines are very important determinants of the treatments
      given in practice in low- income settings. In many African settings most
      children are treated by clinical officers rather than doctors. These
      clinical officers have less training than doctors, and therefore use
      national guidelines as the basis of how they treat patients to a much
      greater extent than doctors in high- income countries.
    One paediatrician working in Zambia describes the impact of the trial as
      follows: "These changes were quickly adapted by many African countries
        including Zambia, a step that enabled many HIV infected children to be
        started early on ART and not only have these children survived but they
        have been able to lead a relatively normal childhood. Currently it is
        estimated that about 43,000 children 0-14 years old are receiving ART in
        Zambia, a 50% increase from the 21,120 in 2009 (WHO, UNAIDS, UNICEF
        Progress Report 2010). The impact of the CHER trial has not only been on
        outcome of children but the findings have also helped push for improved
        laboratory diagnostic services in order to initiate early treatment in
        as many infants and children as possible in Zambia...Deaths from
        HIV/AIDS have dramatically dropped in infants and children, as most of
        the children are identified early and commenced on treatment. The CHER
        trial results have had a great impact on treatment of HIV infected
        infants and children, subsequently on survival, hospital admissions and
        ultimately cost of treatment and care for HIV infected infants and
        children" [h].
    As the results have led to changes in guidelines for HIV-infected infants
      worldwide, the research has had a global impact on infants living with HIV
      in both high and low-income settings. It is difficult to say exactly how
      many children have benefited as a result of this research, as the routine
      data collected by most countries does not disaggregate ART coverage
      figures into small enough age- bands. We can, however, extrapolate how
      many lives could potentially be saved based on global figures. Each year
      around 390,000 children are infected with HIV [i]. The vast
      majority of these children were vertically-infected infants. CHER found
      that early ART reduced infant mortality from 16% to 4%. If we assume that
      the WHO guidelines were fully implemented worldwide, the results of this
      trial would lead to around 46,800 lives being saved each year (although
      the number of infected infants will decline with the scale-up of
      Prevention of Mother To Child Transmission programmes).
    The costing study found that early ART for infants had lower costs per
      child to the health system than deferred ART or the strategy that was
      routine care at the time in South Africa ($1,387 vs $2,440 vs $3,008
      respectively) [ref 3, above]. This means that the health system in
      South Africa (and possibly other settings) will benefit through reduced
      costs of treating HIV-infected infants, as they require less
      hospitalisation. In 2011 there were approximately 29,000 new infections in
      children in South Africa. If all these newly-infected infants had been
      treated early, it could save the South African health system as much as 47
      million USD.
    
ImpactSummary

    HIV-infected infants are at high risk of disease progression and death.
      Until 2008 guidelines recommended waiting until the infant displayed
      symptoms, or had a weakened immune system before starting treatment. The
      CHER trial found that starting infected infants on antiretroviral therapy
      as early as possible substantially reduced mortality compared with waiting
      until they developed symptoms or their immune system weakened. These
      results led quickly to changes in guidelines for treating HIV-infected
      infants issued by the US, World Health Organisation (WHO), Paediatric
      European Network for Treatment of AIDS (PENTA) and South Africa. These
      revised guidelines, if fully implemented along with early infant
      diagnosis, would reduce the number of infant deaths because of HIV by 76%,
      saving the lives of approximately 46,800 infants globally each year.
    
UnderpinningResearch

    The CHER trial aimed to see if giving a limited course of anti-retroviral
      therapy (ART) to babies as soon as possible after their HIV status was
      known would have a long-term health benefit, when compared with
      HIV-infected babies who are treated after they develop symptoms of HIV, or
      when their immune system has become weakened. Babies were randomised into
      three groups:
    
      delayed ART until their immune system became weak (measured through a
        CD4 count)
      immediate ART, which was then stopped when the babies reached the age
        of one year
      immediate ART which was then stopped when they were two years old.
    
    The trial began in August 2005. In June 2007 the IDMC recommended
      modifying the trial to stop enrolment into Arm 1, enrolled infants to be
      urgently assessed for ART, immediate release of the results of Arm 1
      versus Arms 2 &amp; 3, and trial follow-up to continue. This was because
      the interim analysis showed that immediate ART reduced mortality by 76%,
      and disease progression by 75% after a median follow-up of 32 weeks [1,2].
    Follow-up continued until September 2011, and the final results were
      presented at a conference in March 2012 [4].
    This was the first large randomised trial looking at when infants should
      start ART.
    Based on the early results, we contributed to a costing study to look at
      the costs of early versus deferred ART for infants in South Africa. This
      found that early treatment was actually cheaper than deferred ART, mainly
      because of the reduction in hospitalisation [3].
    The trial was carried out in collaboration with the Perinatal HIV
      Research Unit of the University of Witwatersrand, and the Children's
      Infectious Disease Clinical Research Unit of Stellenbosch University, as
      part of the CIPRA-SA programme. Professors Di Gibb and Abdel Babiker from
      MRC Clinical Trials Unit (now part of UCL) played a major role in
      designing the study, were part of the Trial Steering and Management
      groups, advised on the execution of the trial, carried out and supervised
      the statistical analyses, and wrote the papers with their South African
      colleagues, Dr Avy Violari and Professor Mark Cotton.
    A Wellcome Trust Fellowship has been awarded for Helen Payne to work with
      the Cape Town Group, supervised by Nigel Klein and Robin Callard from the
      UCL Institute of Child Health, Di Gibb and Abdel Babiker from MRC CTU, now
      part of UCL, and Prof Mark Cotton from Cape Town. This work will provide
      very important data on the immunology of early ART initiation in babies as
      well as on stopping treatment. In addition following reports of the
      `functional cure' of the Mississippi baby, further work is ongoing with
      collaborators in US as part of the `cure' agenda.
    