CaseStudyId: 22421
Title: 
    Improving management of schizophrenia and severe mental illnesses in
      general practice
    

ImpactDetails

    Impact on NICE Guidelines:
    Our evidence regarding CVD was used by NICE in the 2009 update of their
      schizophrenia guideline (CG 082). This recommends that annual physical
      review of these patients should focus on cardiovascular risk factors
      including blood pressure, cholesterol, HDL cholesterol, smoking and
      diabetes. The guideline cites five of our papers as the reason for
      focussing on CVD risk factors in annual reviews for people with
      schizophrenia in national mental health policy. Nazareth was on the expert
      advisory panel of the NICE Schizophrenia guideline group [a].
    Impact on European Guidelines:
    Our work was cited as the research evidence justifying a position
      statement by the European Psychiatric Association (EPA), supported by the
      European Association for the Study of Diabetes (EASD) and the European
      Society of Cardiology (ESC) in 2009. Their statement was designed to
      improve the care of patients suffering from severe mental illness. They
      cite two of our papers as the rationale for focusing on CVD risk screening
      in people with SMI. The statement refers in detail to our systematic
      review regarding the relative incidence of CVD risk factors in SMI, as
      well as our research demonstrating excess CVD mortality in young people
      with SMI [b].
    The position statement from the EPA has had further impact both in the UK
      and Australia. The EPA position document is referenced as the rationale
      for specific algorithms to help mental health professionals to deal with
      cardiovascular risk factors in people with SMI [c]. In turn the
      Australian guidelines have recently been adapted and endorsed by the Royal
      College of General Practitioners, Royal College of Psychiatrists, Royal
      College of Nursing, Royal College of Physicians, HQIP, Rethink Mental
      Illness and Diabetes UK to provide guidance in line with the SMI QoF (see
      below) and NICE guidance, which largely originates from the research done
      at UCL [d]. These guidelines have been sent to every GP and
      psychiatrist in the UK.
    Impact on Psychopharmacology guidance:
    The British Association of Psychopharmacologists produces evidence-based
      guidelines for international and national prescribing in mental health,
      aimed at all psychiatrists and other clinicians who prescribe in mental
      health. Their schizophrenia consensus guidelines cite two of our papers
      (Osborn, 2006; Osborn 2008) in making their recommendations regarding
      prescribing antipsychotics and screening for CVD risk factors for people
      with SMI who have been prescribed antipsychotic medications [e].
    Impact on Department of Health Policy:
    The Department of Health published a new mental health strategy in 2011
      titled "No health without mental health". It made a number of
      recommendations regarding the interface between physical and mental
      health. This included six main objectives, including "that more people
      with mental health problems will have good physical health". Osborn was
      invited to present our research findings to specific workshops run by the
      DH to formulate this strategy [f].
    Once published, the policy was developed into a guide for general
      practitioners by the Centre for Mental Health, in alliance with seven key
      national mental health organisations. These third sector organisations
      (outside the NHS) such as RETHINK cite our mortality work as one of the
      reasons why general practitioners should focus on CVD screening for people
      with mental disorders [g].
    Impact on the Quality Outcomes Framework:
    In 2011, our influence on NICE guidelines led to changes in the national
      GP contract, through the Quality Outcomes Framework (QoF) for people with
      severe mental illnesses [h]. GPs are now remunerated for ensuring
      that people with SMI have had specific cardiovascular risk factors
      measured within the last 15 months. The QoF documents explicitly state
      that their recommendations are in line with the NICE schizophrenia
      guidelines regarding CVD screening and hence include screening for BMI,
      cholesterol, blood pressure and diabetes screening in the outcomes
      framework for SMI (see above). Our research has thus directly impacted on
      the day to day care provided for people with severe mental illnesses in
      general practices across England through NICE and into QoF.
    Impact elsewhere in the UK
    Further, the two most cited of our research papers on this topic were
      used by the Scottish QoF in 2008, recommending that Scottish GPs included
      these cardiovascular measurements in their annual assessments [i].
    These important changes within the NHS are thus leading to a reduction in
      the inequalities of care that occur in people with schizophrenia and
      severe mental illnesses.
    
ImpactSummary

    Our research has led to major changes in the management of people with
      severe mental illness (SMI) in general practice. Our findings that people
      with schizophrenia are at greater risk of cardiovascular diseases informed
      NICE guidance in the UK and international guidelines. The Department of
      Health's strategy on Mental Health was influenced by our work on the
      interface between physical and mental health. Recommendations in the NICE
      guidance have now been taken up by the NHS Quality Outcomes Framework
      (QoF) in England and Scotland. General practitioners are specifically
      required to monitor BMI (Body Mass Index), blood pressure, and glucose and
      serum lipids levels in all registered patients with SMI.
    
UnderpinningResearch

    UCL has led internationally on research on the care offered to people
      with severe mental illnesses (i.e. schizophrenia and bipolar illnesses) in
      general practice. Little was known about the primary care management of
      this population prior to us initiating research work on this topic in the
      1990s. Professor Irwin Nazareth and colleagues (Department of Primary Care
      &amp; Population Health) found that although people with schizophrenia
      were frequent attenders, their management was unstructured with little
      attention given to their physical health, compared to the care offered to
      people with other chronic diseases. We found that one in three people with
      schizophrenia were exclusively managed by their general practitioners with
      no contact with a psychiatrist. Moreover, most people with schizophrenia
      were willing to have their physical and psychological health needs managed
      by their general practitioners [1]. Early evidence from an
      exploratory controlled evaluation suggested beneficial trends from
      structured health care delivered in primary care [2]. Since then,
      we have led on a programme of MRC-funded research to identify and reduce
      cardiovascular disease (CVD) in NHS patients with severe mental disorders.
    Our research demonstrated high relative rates of cardiovascular mortality
      in people with severe mental illnesses when compared to people without
      these disorders. There was a threefold risk of cardiovascular deaths in
      people with schizophrenia between the age of 18-50, and twice the risk in
      people aged 50-75 [5].
    Further research on this topic found an excess rate of abnormal lipids
      (especially low levels of HDL), smoking and diabetes in people with severe
      mental illnesses in general practice compared with healthy controls [4].
      The significantly lower level of HDL in people with schizophrenia was a
      novel finding and had never been previously reported. This work also
      revealed that poor diets and low levels of physical activity were common
      in this group of people and were worthy targets for interventions [6].
      Our research additionally demonstrated that people with mental disorders
      were willing to participate in CVD screening in primary care [3]
      and the importance of this finding was highlighted in a Lancet editorial
      (vol 367; 1469-71).
    We then published a systematic review regarding lipids, diabetes and
      hypertension levels as well as qualitative and quantitative findings to
      facilitate the design of a new nurse-led intervention for cardiovascular
      screening in SMI [7]. This led to a successful phase II trial of
      the intervention [8] subsequently highlighted as a promising
      development for clinical services in a Lancet editorial in 2011 (Lancet
      377; 611).
    Our ongoing research, funded by the Department of Health and NIHR,
      explores inequalities in cancer and CVD screening in people with mental
      illnesses and intellectual disabilities. We are also investigating the
      contribution of antipsychotic medication to cardiovascular risk in these
      people. Furthermore, we are developing and testing CVD risk prediction
      models for people with SMI, and refining and evaluating a an intervention
      delivered over a period of one year within a cluster trial based in
      primary care settings.
    