CaseStudyId: 22422
Title: 
    Influencing global policy on antiretroviral treatment priorities
    

ImpactDetails

    The research described above provided an evidence base to continue the
      rollout of ART in sub-Saharan Africa without diverting resources for ART
      to measures of viral load &#8212; a policy which had come under question in
      previous years. It was seen as critical to understand whether the
      consequences of roll out of ART without viral load monitoring were so
      severe (due to concerns over transmission of HIV drug resistance) as to
      mean that introduction of such testing should be prioritised over
      continued ART expansion by ART programmes. Our findings provided support
      for continued roll out in settings where viral load monitoring was not
      available. A comment paper written by colleagues from the Global Fund for
      HIV, TB and Malaria (the body which, along with U.S. President's Emergency
      Plan for AIDS Relief (PEPFAR), provided most funds for the ART roll-out)
      concluded that "Phillips and colleagues' findings strengthen the policy
        consensus and WHO recommendation &#8212; so far based on individual patient
        outcomes and cost-effectiveness in the shorter term &#8212; that resource-poor
        countries need not delay ART roll-out because of limitations in
        laboratory capacity" [a].
    The Director/Coordinator of Treatment and Prevention Scale-up at the WHO
      HIV Department at that time reports that "the work... adapting the HIV
        synthesis to model the outcome of ART in low-income settings under
        different monitoring practices helped shape global ART roll-out policy
        and practice. Furthermore, because of its unique utility and approach,
        the modelling work and synthesis adaptations continue to be used to
        inform global policy development" [b].
    Since 2008, the trajectory of the number of people on ART has increased,
      with 9.7 million people now on ART [c]. Almost all countries in
      sub-Saharan Africa (with the exceptions of South Africa and Botswana) have
      been providing ART without regular viral load monitoring. Point of care
      tests for viral load are now close to coming to market and WHO has started
      to encourage use of viral load testing in patient monitoring as resources
      allow, so long as this does not inhibit roll-out.
    Our publications in 2008 and 2011 were written jointly with colleagues at
      WHO responsible for the public health approach [d], and influenced
      their policy as described &#8212; i.e. to prioritise the continued expansion of
      roll-out of ART over introduction of viral load monitoring, but to
      encourage research and development of implementable viral load measurement
      technology. The two publications are officially approved WHO publications
      and our work has been cited in WHO guidelines. The 2008 WHO progress
      report "Towards Universal access: Scaling up priority HIV/AIDS
      interventions in the health sector" cites our publication from the
      previous year as providing support for WHO's recommendations on scaling up
      ART provision [e]. Furthermore, there were 11 references in total
      to the wider work of the HIV Epidemiology &amp; Biostatistics Group of the
      Research Department of Infection &amp; Population Health in the key WHO
      guideline "Antiretroviral therapy for HIV infection in adults and
      adolescents. Recommendations for a public health approach" [f].
    Our model has also been used by the Bill and Melinda Gates Foundation in
      their assessment of CD4 investment options, and was influential in them
      deciding to support development of a new point of care test. A program
      officer at the Foundation writes that: "I have used your modeling
        analysis several times when we have been evaluating our options for CD4
        investment. The impact of the Zyomyx test is a critical component of our
        decision making and we are constantly re-evaluating our decisions as we
        move forward, so your results have been considered again and again"
      [g].
    
ImpactSummary

    Our work with the World Health Organisation (WHO) had a major impact on
      global HIV treatment priorities at a critical time in the roll-out of
      anti-retroviral treatment (ART) worldwide. Concern had been expressed that
      if ART was provided without simultaneous monitoring of HIV viral load to
      determine switch in treatment, this would lead to an epidemic of drug
      resistant HIV. It was argued that viral load monitoring should be
      introduced as a priority, despite the fact that this was expensive and
      would inevitably divert resources from ART provision. We used a simulation
      model to predict the impact of lack of viral load monitoring and showed
      that while development of viral load assays was important, ART should be
      prioritised. As a result, the roll out of ART continued despite continued
      lack of viral load monitoring, and there are now over 9 million people on
      ART.
    
UnderpinningResearch

    The underpinning research described below was carried out by the HIV
      Epidemiology and Biostatistics Group at UCL led by Professor Andrew
      Phillips, and was a collaboration with the WHO HIV/AIDS Department.
    In the early-2000s, global plans were being put in place to expand access
      to ART as rapidly as possible to low resource settings (particularly
      sub-Saharan Africa) where most people with HIV live. In order to make this
      feasible, the WHO developed a public health approach, which involved use
      of standard regimens with little requirement for the monitoring that was
      being used at that time in developed country settings. Use of CD4 counts,
      particularly to select who should start ART, was encouraged but measures
      of viral load were very expensive in the context of low resource settings
      (the current fully loaded cost of a viral load test is the cost of around
      8 months of ART for one person) and could not be used in most settings. At
      that time, however, increasing concerns were being expressed that
      widespread delivery of ART without use of viral load monitoring to
      identify people failing ART could lead to widespread development of drug
      resistance, with consequences for both the treated individuals and for the
      population, due to transmission of drug resistant HIV. There was no
      research available to evaluate the likely consequences of the ongoing
      roll-out strategy.
    In previous work done by our group between 2003 and 2007, we had
      developed a stochastic computer simulation model of HIV progression and
      the effect of ART, based on our extensive work on studying HIV in cohort
      studies. The first paper from this model, published in 2007, made
      projections about the HIV population in the UK [1]. As a result of
      concerns about the roll out of ART in low-resource settings, we adapted
      our model to investigate the impact of lack of viral load monitoring on
      outcomes of ART in low resource settings [2] and included a
      transmission component to consider transmitted drug resistance [3].
      This work helped us understand what the consequences of provision of ART
      without viral load monitoring were likely to be, in terms of patient
      survival and transmission of drug resistance. We showed that eventual use
      of viral load monitoring is important, particularly to avoid future
      widespread transmission of drug resistance, and that development of new
      tests which are not dependent on substantial laboratory infrastructure or
      highly trained staff should be a key research and development priority.
      However, we also showed that the impact on mortality of lack of viral load
      monitoring was likely to be modest in the short to medium term, relative
      to the mortality impact of failing to provide more widespread ART. Thus
      the message was to continue the roll-out without re-directing resources to
      viral load measurement but to encourage the development of cheaper tests.
    Continuing our research in this areas, we are currently working with WHO
      on assessing the impact on transmission of HIV drug resistance of starting
      more people on ART earlier, and defining threshold levels of transmitted
      drug resistance beyond which a change in public health policy is required.
      In further work using the model, we are collaborating with GSK Biologicals
      to model potential effects of their vaccines. We collaborate on this
      research with health economist colleagues at the London School of Hygiene
      and Tropical Medicine (Alec Miners) and, more recently, the University of
      York (Paul Revill).
    