CaseStudyId: 23093
Title: 
    Improved surgical outcomes achieved through perioperative circulatory
      optimisation guided by oesophageal Doppler
    

ImpactDetails

    In developing the device, Singer worked closely with the manufacturer
      (formerly Doptex, now
      Deltex Medical), a British company based in Chichester. This close
      collaboration allied his clinical
      and translational expertise with their engineering and technical skills.
      The device, now marketed as
      the CardioQ, has "changed the way in which doctors can care for
        patients having major surgery or
        in intensive care. It allows doctors to intervene quickly and safely
        based on small changes in
        circulating blood volume and so avoid the dangers of reduced oxygen
        delivery" [a].
    To date, more than 500,000 patients have benefitted from the use of the
      CardioQ in surgery and in
      intensive care. By the end of 2012, a total of 926 monitors had been
      installed in the UK and
      monitors have been sold widely in many other countries including the US,
      Canada, South America
      and Continental Europe [a]. In the period 2008-13 this amounted to
      over &#163;33m in sales for Deltex
      [b]. The company employs around 65 people, mostly in the UK, and
      the CardioQ is their sole
      product.
    The outcome benefits (reduced complications, shorter ICU and hospital
      stay) accruing from the
      perioperative optimisation studies were evaluated and endorsed
      independently by the US Agency
      for Healthcare Research and Quality [c] and the NIHR Health
      Technology Assessment
      Programme [d]. In March 2011 NICE published its Medical
      Technologies Guidance (MTG3)
      recommending the use of oesophageal Doppler monitoring (ODM) in high-risk
      surgery. NICE
      estimated that its use could save around &#163;1,000 each time it is used for
      high-risk surgery, and up
      to &#163;400m per year for the NHS as a whole [e].
    In the same year, the NHS Innovative Technology Adoption Procurement
      Programme (ITAPP)
      selected oesophageal Doppler-guided intra-operative fluid management as
      one of three
      technologies for wider adoption by the NHS in England [f]. Later
      that year, the NHS Innovation
      Health &amp; Wealth Review named ODM as one of six high impact innovations
      and called for the
      widespread implementation of ODM for fluid management in surgery, stating
      that this technology
      "can reduce mortality rates for elective procedures, improve the
        quality of care for more than
        800,000 patients a year, and save the NHS at least &#163;400m annually" [g].
      This was reported in the
      media at the time, including on the BBC News website [h].
    In May 2012, the NHS National Technology Adoption Centre published its
      Intraoperative Fluid
      Management Technologies (IOFMT) Adoption Pack to encourage adoption
      throughout the NHS as
      a recommended High Impact Innovation [i]. Hospital trusts have to
      implement ODM at projected
      target levels in 2013/14 or lose access to their CQUIN payments, which
      make up 2.5% of their
      budget.
    Looking outside the UK, the device has been adopted or is under formal
      evaluation by health
      regions/large hospital groups in the USA, France, Spain, and Canada. The
      Entralgo Agency in
      Spain have evaluated the device and confirmed its utility. In April 2013,
      the US Centres for
      Medicare and Medicaid Services (CMS) granted ODM its own unique code for
      physician
      reimbursement. In addition, CMS set a standard amount of $101 that it will
      reimburse US doctors
      for each use of an ODM probe in either surgery for patients requiring
      intra-operative fluid
      optimisation or for ventilated patients in intensive care. This is a very
      significant development for
      the ODM in the USA and very rare that the CMS grant an individual
      technology with such a code
      (especially to a small British company) [j].
    In May 2013, the professional body for anaesthetists in France Soci&#233;t&#233;
      Fran&#231;aise d'Anesth&#233;sie et
      de R&#233;animation ('SFAR') published new guidelines setting out recommended
      fluid management
      best practice for its members. These guidelines make it clear that
      ODM-guided fluid management
      should be used in all high risk surgery in France, estimated to cover
      circa 750,000 patients a year.
      All of these recommendations are graded in the highest category '1+',
      meaning that SFAR
      members are expected to comply because the evidence level is high, and
      that future evidence is
      unlikely to change the conclusions from the current evidence. In France
      clinical guidelines from
      professional societies determine the standards expected of their members
      based on clinical
      benefit. The recommendations are based on the ODM evidence and the
      guidelines make it clear
      that this evidence should not be assumed to apply to alternative
      technologies. The
      recommendations apply to all high risk surgery, defined as surgery with an
      increased risk of post-
      operative complications due to either the health of the patient or the
      nature of the surgery; typically
      this excludes minor day-case surgery and surgery lasting fewer than two
      hours with low levels of
      post-operative complication [k].
    Deltex Medical won the National Outstanding Achievement category in the
      2013 UK Healthcare
      Business Awards held at the NHS Healthcare Innovation Expo [l].
    
ImpactSummary

    As a result of research undertaken by Professor Mervyn Singer and
      colleagues at UCL, the
      oesophageal Doppler haemodynamic monitoring device is now a standard of
      care in intensive care
      units and operating theatres. The research underpinned the development of
      the CardioQ
      Oesophageal Doppler Monitor that guides optimisation of the circulation in
      critically ill and
      perioperative patients. In multiple studies its use has led to significant
      reductions in postoperative
      complication rates and length of stay in patients undergoing high-risk
      surgery. Over 500,000
      patients have now benefitted from this technology that, between 2008-13,
      generated over &#163;33m in
      sales for its manufacturer, Deltex Medical. The device is recommended in
      NICE guidance and has
      been identified by the Department of Health as one of six high impact
      innovations to be
      implemented fully across the NHS.
    
UnderpinningResearch

    In the late 1980s, the CardioQ Oesophageal Doppler Monitor was conceived
      by Mervyn Singer
      while a registrar at Mount Vernon Hospital. He then validated the device
      and performed proof-of-concept
      studies during his research fellowship at St George's Hospital Medical
      School. Work at
      UCL by Singer (as Lecturer/Senior Lecturer/Reader/Professor) between 1993
      and 2004 further
      validated the device and, crucially, assessed its utility through a series
      of studies, including three of
      the early perioperative outcome RCTs. This work done at UCL underpinned
      the commercial
      development of the device and its widespread adoption since.
    The device utilises a Doppler ultrasound probe inserted via the mouth
      into the oesophagus. The
      probe is connected to a monitor that displays flow velocity waveforms of
      blood being pumped down
      the descending thoracic aorta. Correct focussing of the probe is readily
      and reliably achieved within
      just a few minutes, and can be performed by either a doctor or nurse.
      Integral software,
      incorporating a nomogram developed by Singer, computes in real time a
      close estimate of absolute
      left ventricular cardiac output and, from the waveform shape, considerable
      information on left
      ventricular filling, contractility and afterload. These data can be used
      to quickly detect any
      deterioration in circulatory status, and to guide optimal fluid and drug
      therapy.
    Ten studies have been performed at UCL, including assessments of the
      circulatory stress induced
      by chest physiotherapy, transurethral prostatectomy and cardiac surgery
      (with demonstration of its
      prognostic utility), and optimisation of mechanical ventilation settings.
      Importantly, three of the
      studies were single-centre, randomised controlled trials (RCTs) in
      patients undergoing
      haemodynamic optimisation either during [1] or after [2]
      cardiac surgery, or during intraoperative
      repair of fractured hips [3]. The first study was performed by
      Monty Mythen (then Clinical Research
      Fellow, now Professor at UCL) and the latter two were led by Singer. All
      three studies reported
      significant reductions in postoperative complications and hospital stay in
      patients optimised by
      oesophageal Doppler, as compared to patients receiving standard-of-care.
    A recent systematic review/meta-analysis of perioperative optimisation
      studies reported on nine
      oesophageal Doppler perioperative optimisation studies, demonstrating a
      major reduction in post-operative
      complications through its use (odds ratio [95% CI] 0.41 [0.30-0.57])
      (Hamilton et al).To
      assess the generalisability of these results, the NHS Technology Adoption
      Centre organised a
      before-after study in three UK hospitals (including the Whittington
      Hospital, London) comparing
      outcomes in 649 surgical patients after implementation of the CardioQ
      technology against 658
      matched cases before implementation. Total length of stay was reduced by
      3.7 days across each
      site (Kuper et al).
    All of the UCL studies were funded internally with the exception of Ref 3
      below where Deltex
      Medical (the manufacturer of CardioQ) provided an unrestricted educational
      grant.
    