CaseStudyId: 23094
Title: 
    Alternatives to medication improve quality of life for children with
      epilepsy
    

ImpactDetails

    Clinical practice and patient benefit
    As a result of the neuroimaging work described above, we have
      increased the number of children
      who can be considered for surgery. This approach has underpinned the
      development of the
      epilepsy surgery programme at Great Ormond Street Hospital (GOSH), now one
      of the largest
      epilepsy surgery units in Europe and the largest in the UK. Numbers of
      patients per year have
      increased from 40/year in 2004 to 70/year in 2012 [a].
    The benefit of this surgery to the patients is reduction if not abolition
      of seizures. Children are
      carefully evaluated to determine whether the seizures are coming from one
      area, and whether that
      area can be removed without further functional compromise. Secondary
      benefits that have been
      suggested have included optimisation of neurodevelopmental progress and
      behavioural
      improvement. We have evaluated outcome in several groups of children, and
      demonstrated benefit
      over time [b, c].
    Since 2001, Cross has led the International League Against Epilepsy Task
      Force for Paediatric
      Epilepsy Surgery which has established referral guidelines for children
      with epilepsy for surgery
      [d], with recent evaluation of newer technologies and the
      development of an evaluation protocol
      [e]. The team has also contributed evidence and participated in the
      working groups of the Safe and
      Sustainable Paediatric Neurosurgical review currently being undertaken in
      England and Wales with
      the recent development of the national Children's Epilepsy Surgery Service
      (CESS), launched in
      November 2012, for which GOSH is the lead of four centres, and Professor
      Cross is Clinical
      Advisor [f]. The organisation Epilepsy Action report that: "Professor
        Cross's work identifying both a
        shortfall in the number of operations undertaken in the UK and also the
        benefits of early surgery on
        neurodevelopmental and psychosocial outcomes has greatly assisted in the
        campaign to improve
        children's surgery in England. The outcome of our (and others)
        campaigning, underscored by
        Professor Cross's work, led to the NHS in England agreeing in 2012 to
        nationally commission
        children's epilepsy surgery [the CESS]" [g].
    Following our establishment of an evidence base for the ketogenic
        diet, our study is now widely
      quoted in service developments and the numbers of children who have been
      initiated and
      sustained on the diet in the UK have increased considerably. The ketogenic
      diet service at Great
      Ormond Street Hospital has been established and funded since 2008 with a
      clinical consultant
      lead, two dieticians and epilepsy nurse support, taking referrals from the
      North London area and
      linking in with other London centres [i]. A clinical network has
      been established amongst other
      centres now set up in the South East; Evelina Children's Hospital, St
      Georges Hospital and
      Addenbrookes Hospital. A recent EME NIHR grant has been achieved involving
      nine centres
      across the UK for a randomised controlled trial of diet utilisation for
      the treatment of epilepsy in
      children under two years of age, led by Cross and GOSH.
    Cross has worked for many years with a parent support group, Matthew's
      Friends, which was
      launched by a parent involved in our ketogenic diet study in 2004. The CEO
      of this organisation
      reports that: "We have seen a huge increase in ketogenic services
        throughout the UK and globally
        and the trial results proved to be a major part of successful business
        cases being made for centres
        to set up a service. Without this evidence proving the efficacy of the
        treatment then I very much
        doubt we would have as many people using the diet as there are currently.
      Professionals from all
        over the world quote the results from this trial and have publically
        thanked the team for carrying out
        such a trial as the information from it has furthered their own services
        and allowed them to treat
        more patients in their own healthcare systems" [j].
    Cross is Chair of the Medical Board of the charity and works with them to
      support parents and
      professionals considering and implementing the ketogenic diet. She has
      been involved in several
      parent and professional information days, as well as preparation of
      material to help implementation
      of the diet. She was on the scientific committee of two of the three
      global conferences on dietary
      therapy of epilepsy and neurological disorders (co-organised with Matthews
      Friends in Edinburgh
      in 2010) and is leading on organisation of the meeting to be held in 2014.
      All have resulted in
      publications as supplements to peer-reviewed journals, one of which Cross
      co-edited in 2012 [k].
      From expertise and experience gleaned from the research, she has recently
      jointly edited a guide
      and cookery book for utilisation by parents with colleagues from Australia
      [l].
    In 2012, NICE guidelines on the diagnosis and management of the
      epilepsies in adults and
      children in primary and secondary care (for which Cross was on the
      Guideline Development
      Group) made the following recommendation: "Refer children and young
        people with epilepsy
        whose seizures have not responded to appropriate AEDs to a tertiary
        paediatric epilepsy specialist
        for consideration of the use of a ketogenic diet." The guideline
      made specific reference to the
      underpinning research described above as supporting evidence for this
      recommendation [m].
      Cross was also integral to the international consensus guidelines for
      optimal management of
      children utilising the ketogenic diet, published in 2009 [n].
    Media and public engagement
    As a result of this work, we have contributed to various newspaper and
      television news articles and
      supplements including the Daily Mail, Daily Express, Sunday Times, Times
      and BBC. The epilepsy
      surgery and ketogenic diet programmes have also been the focus of TV
      documentaries and news
      features, the most recent at the launch of the CESS programme in 2012.
      Following development of
      the CESS, Cross has worked with Epilepsy Action on information documents
      about the CESS
      programme for parents and professionals, and the results of research
      performed have ensured
      accuracy of information [g]. She has also worked with Young
      Epilepsy, a charitable organisation
      working towards improving the lives of children and young people with
      epilepsy [o]. Young
      Epilepsy through their information and education unit, with advice from
      Cross, run training days for
      both parents and professionals, disseminating information about the
      benefits of surgery and early
      referral.
    Training
    In addition to the training above, the unit has developed an
      international reputation for training
      clinical fellows from around the world. Great Ormond Street is the lead
      for the development of the
      National Epilepsy Surgery Programme. Cross has been integral to the
      development of
      standardised epilepsy training courses through the British Paediatric
      Neurology Association. Over
      3,000 paediatricians have now passed through the courses and Cross remains
      Chair of the
      Steering Committee [p].
    
ImpactSummary

    Our research on alternatives to medication in the treatment of childhood
      epilepsy has resulted in
      increasing rates of surgery with better outcomes, and a new clinical
      service &#8212; the national
      Children's Epilepsy Surgery Service (CESS) &#8212; being commissioned in England
      and Wales. We
      have also developed an evidence base for ketogenic dietary therapy,
      resulting in an increase in
      service provision. Many more patients are benefiting from this therapy,
      which is now recommended
      in NICE guidelines. Throughout our programme of research we have engaged
      with charities and
      patient groups to disseminate the results of our research as widely as
      possible.
    
UnderpinningResearch

    Epilepsy affects 112,000 children and young people in the UK, of whom two
      thirds will respond to
      antiepileptic medication, or go into spontaneous remission. For the
      remaining third, however,
      seizures persist, and are associated with a reduced quality of life.
      Therefore, since 1993, research
      at the UCL Institute of Child Health's Neurosciences Unit has investigated
      alternative approaches
      to medication, with a particular emphasis on the roles of surgery and
      dietary treatments as
      alternatives to antiepileptic drugs.
    Epilepsy surgery, targeted at removing the source of seizures, can
      lead to long-term seizure relief
      where medication has been unsuccessful. Our initial research evaluated
      newer imaging
        techniques in the detection of brain abnormalities in children with
      focal epilepsy utilising MRI, as
      well as relating these areas to seizure onset utilising functional imaging
      e.g. single photon emission
      computed tomography [1]. Further work in collaboration with the
      departments of Clinical
      Neurophysiology and Developmental Cognitive Neuroscience has developed functional
        MRI, both
      for determining areas of motor and language cortex in relation to the
      epileptic focus to be removed,
      as well as more recently linking electrical to structural brain
      abnormality for determining the source
      of seizures [2]. We have also performed outcome studies
      demonstrating the relative merits of early
      surgery in carefully selected populations, with at least maintained
      cognitive ability following
      surgery, suggesting a maintained developmental trajectory [3].
      More recent work has
      demonstrated long-term improvements in cognition associated with
      weaning-off medication [4]. An
      epidemiological community-based cohort study has outlined the consequence
      of early onset
      epilepsy with uniformly poor outcomes, and has enabled the delineation of
      neurodevelopment in
      children with ongoing seizures by which the impact of intervention can be
      compared [5].
    For some patients, including those for whom surgery may not be an option,
      treatment may involve
      the ketogenic diet. This is a high fat diet designed to mimic the
      metabolic effects of starvation.
      Although this dietary treatment has been used in the treatment of
      childhood epilepsy for many
      years, our group undertook the first randomised controlled trial of its
      use in childhood epilepsy, and
      established its benefit equivalent to any new anti-epileptic drug with no
      difference between types of
      diet applied [6]. Collaborative work with UCL's Department of
      Clinical Chemistry and Institute of
      Neurology is now being undertaken to determine a possible mechanism of
      action for its effect with
      plans for translation to clinical practice through clinical trials.
    