CaseStudyId: 23128
Title: 
    Molecular genetic characterisation of the causes of familial
      hypercholesterolaemia has led to improved diagnosis, prevention and
      treatment.
    

ImpactDetails

    The underpinning research described above has had a major impact in
      transforming the management and identification of patients with FH. The
      three specific impacts described below are: (1) development and validation
      of screening methods which are now in use throughout the UK; (2)
      contribution of research to the development of NICE guidelines (CG71); (3)
      impact on the design of the NHS's Vascular Checks programme to increase
      the reach of our work.
    FH is one of the most common Mendelian disorders, affecting 1 in 500
      members of the general population &#8212; or approximately 120,000 people in the
      UK. People with FH have very high levels of low density lipoprotein
      cholesterol (LDL-C) from birth and are at extremely high risk of
      developing early heart disease. This can be prevented by early treatment
      with a high intensity lipid-lowering therapy such as statins.
      Unfortunately, only 15,000 FH patients have been identified to date and
      are being adequately treated. Since FH is a monogenic disorder, the best
      way to find new FH patients is by identifying the genetic mutation in the
      proband and "cascade testing" all their first degree relatives, 50% of
      whom will also be carriers.
    DNA screening methods we developed have been used commonly in DNA
      diagnostic laboratories throughout the UK. The identification and
      characterisation of the common mutations in LDLR, APOB and PCSK9 in FH
      patients in the UK led to the development of a DNA test kit which was
      commercialised by Tepnel (now Geneprobe) during the Department of
      Health-funded London IDEAS Genetic Knowledge Park of which Professor
      Humphries was CEO. Although now superseded by new technologies, the
      availability of the Elucigene FH20 kit allowed labs to take on FH genetic
      testing and offer it widely and therefore led to the identification of the
      molecular cause of FH in a large number of patients. This information was
      then used for testing their relatives. In 2008, Humphries also contributed
      to the first UK Genetic Testing Network "Gene Dossier" for FH obtained by
      the GOSH DNA laboratory [a].
    The demonstration of the feasibility, acceptability and
      cost-effectiveness of FH cascade testing carried out at UCL was a major
      part of the evidence that was presented to the NICE Guideline Development
      Group, which led to their recommendation that DNA testing should be
      offered to all FH patients to confirm their diagnosis and to use the DNA
      information for cascade testing in their relatives [b]. The NICE
      guidelines (CG71) for the identification and management of FH patients
      were published in 2008 and Humphries was the Lead Clinical Advisor for
      these guidelines. Implementation guidelines and costing tools were also
      part of the NICE work, along with further NICE Quality Standards,
      published in August 2013.
    Progress in implementing these guidelines was examined in a pilot audit,
      again led by Humphries and run through the Royal College of Physicians,
      which reported in 2009 [c]. This was followed by a national audit
      of 140 Lipid Clinics in the UK which reported in December 2010. The audit
      revealed that DNA and cascade testing had been implemented well in
      Scotland, Northern Ireland and Wales but almost not at all in England.
      Nevertheless, 26% of patients seen over a 5-month period at the surveyed
      clinics were offered a DNA test. At that time, only 21% of trusts reported
      that they had access to a family cascade testing system for FH, but where
      individuals had a DNA test, the process of cascade testing was initiated
      in 72% of adults and 54% of paediatric cases [d]. According to the
      Clinical Molecular Genetics Society Audit of Data for the year 2011-2012,
      a total of 3,235 DNA tests for FH were performed in the laboratories of
      its members (including all the Regional Genetic Laboratories) during that
      period. The audit reported that this was an increase over previous years [e].
      Humphries has continued public awareness work since the report was
      published, with articles about cascade testing appearing, for example, in
      the Daily Mail, on BBC News and in the Guardian [f].
    In order to identify further FH patients as index cases for cascade
      testing, Humphries has worked with the National Screening Committee to
      include FH criteria in the NHS Vascular Checks programme [g].
      Individuals with a total cholesterol level over 7.5mmol/l who, based on
      the diagnostic criteria of the Simon Broome Register, are likely to have
      FH, will be flagged and referred to their local lipid clinic [h].
    Information on FH has been made available to all UK GPs through a 2009
      BHF factfile prepared by Humphries [i]. Our research findings are
      outlined (and directly referenced) in the information given, and cascade
      screening is recommended. Information based on our research is also given
      to patients through articles in the HEARTUK magazine and their website [j].
    
ImpactSummary

    Basic molecular genetic research undertaken over the last 20 years by UCL
      Cardiovascular Genetics has had a significant impact on the identification
      and treatment of patients with familial hypercholesterolaemia (FH). We
      have developed DNA testing methods in the three genes currently known to
      cause FH and have established DNA diagnostic protocols which are now in
      wide use throughout the UK. As a direct consequence of our work, we
      estimate that up to 3,000 FH patients in the UK have had their diagnosis
      of FH confirmed by a DNA test. Our work led to the National Institute of
      Health and Clinical Excellence (NICE) in 2008 strongly recommending DNA
      and cascade testing and early treatment with high intensity statins, and
      furthermore, the inclusion of FH checks in the NHS's Vascular Checks
      programme.
    
UnderpinningResearch

    The impacts reported below are the result of basic molecular genetic
      research undertaken over the last 20 years that have had a significant
      impact on the identification and treatment of patients with familial
      hypercholesterolaemia (FH). This work led to the establishment of a DNA
      diagnostic service at the Great Ormond Street Hospital in 1997 and the
      establishment of the UCL LDLR mutation database, curated by the UCL
      Cardiovascular Genetics Group, which is regularly updated [1].
    We initially developed high-throughput screening methods &#8212; necessary
      because FH is so common &#8212; which have been adapted for use in the DNA
      diagnostic laboratory setting. Until recently, detecting all possible
      mutations that predispose a patient to FH would be expensive, labour
      intensive, and difficult to implement in clinical practice. We developed a
      kit which, by examining 20 different mutations would rapidly and cheaply
      identify the defect in roughly 50% of all patients where a mutation could
      be identified by a complete gene screen [2]. We further reported
      that c.5% of patients with FH have a large deletion/rearrangement of the
      LDLR gene and proposed a diagnostic algorithm that tests for the 20 most
      common mutations, followed by sequencing of LDLR in those with no detected
      mutation and finally using a commercially available MLPA kit to screen for
      deletions or rearrangements [2]. Using these approaches, mutations
      can be found in up to 80% of FH patients with the strongest clinical
      diagnosis, but in those were no mutation can be detected we recently
      demonstrated that a polygenic (not a single gene) cause is most likely [3].
    In 2000 we reported on the under-diagnosis of FH patients in the
      Oxfordshire area, particularly in young adults (who would benefit most
      from statin treatment) and confirmed this in a UK national survey.
      Together with colleagues at the LSHTM, we then carried out a modelling
      exercise to determine the efficacy of cascade testing vs. other screening
      approaches, and showed that cascade testing was likely to be the most cost
      effective method and was within NICE costing requirements [4].
    Our work in 2006-9 demonstrated the feasibility and acceptability of
      cascade testing through a pilot study, in a Department of Health-funded
      project involving five sites throughout the UK [5]. We also
      analysed the ethical issues involved and proposed appropriate ways of
      dealing with them. With colleagues at Kings College London we demonstrated
      that DNA testing was not associated with significantly greater levels of
      anxiety than measuring plasma cholesterol levels and that it was
      associated with a number of favourable effects [6].
    For patients where the causative mutation cannot be identified, we
      developed age and gender specific LDL cholesterol cut-offs that would
      allow a clear distinction between those with a high probability of not
      having FH versus a high probability of definitely having FH. We defined
      the area of uncertainty where further testing and follow up will be
      required [7].
    In collaboration with Andrew Neil at the University of Oxford and the
      Simon Broome Register Group, we analysed data from the Simon Broome FH
      register (a computerised research register of FH patients, used to track
      the progression of the disease in the UK) to demonstrate a significant
      increase in life expectancy in treated FH patients, firstly with the
      initially available low potency statins, and subsequently with high
      potency statins which have become available in the last ten years.
      Although FH patients on the register who already have heart disease still
      have a roughly two-fold higher future risk of a fatal CHD event even if
      well treated, those who do not have evidence of heart disease can, when
      treated with high intensity statins, expect to have a life expectancy
      which is not significantly lower than the general population [8].
    