CaseStudyId: 23130
Title: 
    Establishment of tacrolimus as the first choice calcineurin inhibitor for
      the immunosuppression regimen in liver transplant recipients
    

ImpactDetails

    Use of tacrolimus as the first line immunosuppression agent in liver
      transplantation had begun to climb from 1999 onwards, although trials at
      this stage had not demonstrated an unambiguous improvement over
      ciclosporin. The research by Burroughs firmly established tacrolimus as
      the optimal calcineurin inhibitor to use in immunosuppressive regimens
      following liver transplantation, and has thus changed standard clinical
      practice in the UK and worldwide. Tacrolimus-based immunosuppression has
      become the "gold-standard". The results of the trial were confirmed in a
      subsequent Cochrane meta-analysis of 16 trials which showed that treating
      100 recipients with tacrolimus instead of ciclosporin would avoid acute
      rejection and steroid-resistant rejection in nine and seven patients,
      respectively, and graft loss and death in five and two patients [a].
    In the US, the Organ Procurement and Transplantation Network (OPTN) and
      Scientific Registry of Transplant Recipients (SRTR) Annual Data Report
      2010 stated that; "Immunosuppressive strategies based on tacrolimus and
        mycophenolate continue to be the dominant early regimen. In 2009, the
        alternative calcineurin inhibitor cyclosporine was used relatively
        infrequently (7.3%) compared with tacrolimus (85.8%)" [b].
      In 2011, they reported that; "Initial immunosuppression for most
        recipients is tacrolimus and mycophenolate mofetil (MMF), commonly in
        conjunction with steroids... By 1 year after transplant, most patients
        are no longer taking steroids and are taking tacrolimus with or without
        MMF. With these immunosuppressive regimens, acute rejection occurs in
        less than 20% of recipients during the first year" [c]. Of
      14,658 patients transplanted between 2002 and 2010 in the US, 92% (13,515)
      were on tacrolimus [d].
    This landmark study therefore changed clinical practice and provided a
      clear benefit to patients. A 2006 meta-analysis of 16 trials demonstrated
      that tacrolimus reduced mortality by 15% and graft loss by 27% compared to
      ciclosporin [e]. Assuming 550 liver transplants per year in the UK
      since 2008, we can estimate that, with 90% of patients treated with
      tacrolimus and 10% ciclosporin, tacrolimus-based immunosuppression has
      resulted in 165 grafts and 192 lives being saved in total for the period
      2008-13.
    
ImpactSummary

    Research at UCL firmly established tacrolimus as the optimal calcineurin
      inhibitor to use in immunosuppressive regimens following liver
      transplantation. Compared to ciclosporin its use improved graft survival
      by 6% and patient survival by 7%. Assuming 550 liver transplants per year
      in the UK since 2008, we can estimate that, with 90% of patients treated
      with tacrolimus and 10% ciclosporin, tacrolimus-based immunosuppression
      has resulted in 165 grafts and 192 lives being saved during the period
      2008-13.
    
UnderpinningResearch

    Long-term immunosuppression with calcineurin inhibitors (ciclosporin or
      tacrolimus) is essential for almost all patients undergoing liver
      transplantation. However, the optimum initial immunosuppression regimen
      was unknown by the late 1990s.
    Previous immunosuppression trials had used rates and patterns of
      rejection as measures of drug efficacy. Results from such studies had
      shown lower rates of cellular rejection, steroid-resistant rejection, and
      chronic rejection in tacrolimus-treated patients compared to those
      receiving the old ciclosporin formulation. However this had been
      superseded by the microemulsified preparation with better bioavailability.
      Equally in liver transplantation the importance of acute cellular
      rejection was questioned as there appeared no correlation between such
      rejection and graft survival. Therefore patient and graft survival had
      become regarded as the most meaningful efficacy measures of
      immunosuppressive agents. At the time of the trial, results from follow-up
      of the early US and European studies suggested better survival rates for
      patients receiving tacrolimus than ciclosporin, although this was not a
      robust finding.
    Beginning in the mid-1990s, Burroughs was the instigator and chief
      co-investigator of the TMC study together with O'Grady (King's College
      London). The investigators undertook a trial to assess the
      immunosuppressive efficacy of tacrolimus compared with micro-emulsified
      ciclosporin, with their protocol standardising all aspects of drug dosing
      and concomitant medication. The study showed that the clinical outcome at
      one year was better with tacrolimus-based immunosuppression.
    The trial's primary outcome was the combined frequency (whichever
      occurred first) of death, retransplantation, or treatment failure for
      immunological reasons, analysed by intention to treat This was achieved in
      62 (21%) of 301 patients in the tacrolimus group versus 99 (32%) of 305
      allocated microemulsified ciclosporin (p=0&#183;001). The authors recommended
      that tacrolimus should be the first choice of calcineurin inhibitor for
      patients receiving their first liver graft [1]. Three-year
      follow-up data confirmed the continued advantage of tacrolimus. A total of
      62.1% of patients randomised to tacrolimus were alive at 3 years with
      their original graft and still on their allocated study medication,
      compared with only 41.6% in the ciclosporin limb [2]. A further
      randomised study comparing tacrolimus and ciclosporin as monotherapy, with
      no routine or maintenance steroids demonstrated that monotherapy provided
      adequate immunosuppression for 87% of tacrolimus versus 64% of ciclosporin
      patients [3]. Long-term follow up showed that tacrolimus
      monotherapy ab initio is a viable immunosuppressive strategy in liver
      transplantation and was associated with lower rejection rates and renal
      complications, compared to ciclosporin [4]. Finally, a systematic
      review to assess the effect of lower doses of tacrolimus on acute
      rejection rates and renal impairment confirmed that these are as effective
      and have fewer side effects [5].
    