CaseStudyId: 23145
Title: 
    Inclusion of flexible sigmoidoscopy in the UK Bowel Cancer Screening
      Programme
    

ImpactDetails

    The major impact of the research has been the implementation of Flexible
      Sigmoidoscopy as a
      single examination at age 55 as part of the National Bowel Cancer
      Screening Programme.
      Following the publication of the trial outcomes in the Lancet in April
      2010, and the results of the
      successful pilot programme in the Journal of Medical Screening in June
      2010, the Prime Minister
      David Cameron announced in October 2010 that once-only FS screening would
      be included in the
      NHS National Bowel Cancer Screening Programme. &#163;60m was pledged over the
      next four years to
      introduce this latest cancer screening technology, with estimates that
      flexible sigmoidoscopy could
      save 3,000 lives a year [a]. Then Health Secretary, Andrew Lansley
      announced that pilot schemes
      for the new screening programme would begin in spring 2011 [b],
      subject to approval by the UK
      National Screening Committee [c].
    The existing NHS Bowel Cancer Screening Programme is based on biennial
      faecal occult blood
      testing using the guaiac-based test (gFOBT), with an immunochemical test
      (iFOBT) being piloted
      in 2014. An `options appraisal' of colorectal cancer (CRC) screening
      modalities commissioned by
      the NHS Cancer Screening Programme in 2004 from SCHARR (University of
      Sheffield School of
      Health and Related Research) had used the baseline data from the FS trial,
      and concluded that FS
      screening was likely to be highly cost-effective compared with other
      methods because it reduced
      incidence of CRC and therefore the costs of the programme would be likely
      to be offset by a
      substantial reduction in the costs of treatment. SCHARR repeated the
      analysis in 2012 using the
      full FS trial outcome data and concluded that: `For a strategy of
        one-off FS screening, the optimal
        effectiveness (QALYS) is achieved with a one-off FS screen in the age
        range 55-60. The most
        cost-effective strategy was FS at age 55 followed by biennial iFOBT
        screening for ages 56-74,
        irrespective of whether the comparator was the current screening
        programme of biennial gFOBT
        60-74 or no screening. This strategy was associated with the greatest
        net monetary benefit and
        also the greatest reduction in CRC incidence, CRC mortality and CRC
        treatment costs'. The report
      also concluded that `it may be cost-effective to spend considerable
        resources on increasing
        screening awareness' which has been a parallel focus of our
      research, with a particular emphasis
      on promoting awareness in order to reduce socioeconomic disparities in CRC
      screening uptake
      [d]. Professor Wardle now has programme grant funding from NIHR
      trial for a trial (ASCEND) of
      methods to reduce socioeconomic disparities in CRC screening uptake as
      Co-PI with Professor
      Rosalind Raine (also UCL).
    In January 2011, the Department of Health's document Improving
        Outcomes: A Strategy for
        Cancer set out the plans for FS screening [e].
      Implementation of the FS programme began in early
      2011, with three `pathfinder' screening sites set up to finalise the
      invitation and organisation
      procedures [f]. One of the centres explored a novel method of
      invitation, but the conclusion from
      the 4,022 invitations across the three sites was that the invitation
      system Wardle and her team had
      developed in the FS Trial and applied in the Demonstration Pilot
      (comprising a `flyer' giving brief
      information about the programme, followed by a dated and timed invitation
      that could be confirmed,
      changed or cancelled, followed by a self-administered enema with detailed
      information about the
      test), was likely to be most successful.
    Plans are now finalised for national implementation, and six sites began
      screening between March
      and July 2013 to finalise invitation procedures and patient information
      materials [g]. Professor
      Wardle's group has been commissioned to carry out real-time audits of
      uptake, patient-reported
      outcomes 24 hours after the test, and patient satisfaction at 12 weeks
      when any follow-up
      procedures should be completed, in the starter sites. This will allow
      rapid identification of any
      problems and make it possible to implement small modifications to optimise
      procedures in advance
      of the national rollout.
    To the end of July, around 2,220 people had received FS screening between
      the pathfinder and
      starter sites. Data from the FS trial indicated that one colorectal cancer
      diagnosis is prevented for
      each 191 people screened. So even with the small number of people screened
      so far, it is likely
      that 11 of these terrible diagnoses have been prevented [h].
    
ImpactSummary

    Our evidence that a single flexible sigmoidoscopy (FS) dramatically
      reduced bowel cancer
      mortality and incidence, combined with evidence of high public
      acceptability in our pilot
      programme, led the Prime Minister to announce in late 2010 that once-only
      FS would be included
      in the UK National Bowel Cancer Screening Programme. The new FS screening
      programme
      started in March 2013 in six pilot centres, and is being progressively
      implemented nationally, with
      full roll-out expected by 2016. All eligible adults will be invited for
      screening around the time of
      their 55th birthday using the invitation and bowel preparation
      protocols developed for the trial. If
      uptake rates similar to those in the pilot are achieved, bowel cancer
      rates could be cut by a
      quarter, and deaths by a third, giving the UK the best colorectal cancer
      (CRC) outcomes in the
      world.
    
UnderpinningResearch

    Colorectal cancer (CRC) is the second most common cause of cancer death,
      and among the most
      feared cancers because of the effects of surgical treatment. Professor
      Jane Wardle from the
      Department of Epidemiology and Public Health at UCL has a long-standing
      collaboration with
      Professor Wendy Atkin (Imperial) to evaluate the potential of flexible
      sigmoidoscopy (FS) to
      prevent CRC through finding and removing pre-cancerous adenomas.
    The natural history of CRC suggested that a single FS examination in the
      age range when
      adenomas are likely to have developed, but before CRC incidence starts to
      rise, could provide
      protection for 10-25 years. With Professor Atkin and colleagues, Professor
      Jane Wardle
      developed and piloted screening and pathology protocols, quality control
      procedures, patient
      management systems, patient information materials, and invitation
      protocols, which included
      pioneering the use of a mailed, self-administered enema to be carried out
      at home before the test.
      The trial team then carried out pilot studies of FS screening in
      asymptomatic 55-64 year olds in
      Welwyn Garden City and Leicester. The results demonstrated that FS could
      be safe and
      acceptable, and the yield of neoplasia suggested there would be a
      significant impact on CRC
      incidence [1].
    The success of the pilot studies led onto the main randomised controlled
      trial in which almost
      400,000 adults around the UK were randomised either to be invited for FS
      screening at their local
      hospital or to usual care, using a novel, two-stage invitation procedure
      which allowed us to make a
      robust estimate of efficacy [2]. Baseline findings revealed high
      rates of pre-malignant adenomas,
      most of which were low risk and could be safely removed during FS. Rates
      of referral for
      colonoscopy were manageable (around 5%), with evidence that the risk of
      harm from the test was
      low [3]. Professor Wardle was responsible for the psychosocial
      elements of the trial and showed
      that uptake and acceptability were high in both men and women, and the
      psychological impact was
      favourable [4]. After 11 years of follow-up for cancer
      registrations and deaths, intention-to-treat
      analyses showed a 23% reduction in incidence and a 31% reduction in
      mortality, with per-protocol
      analyses (attenders vs controls) showing a 33% reduction in incidence and
      43% reduction in
      mortality [5]. Incidence of distal colorectal cancer (rectum and
      sigmoid colon), the secondary
      outcome of the trial, was reduced by half. These were the best results
      ever reported in a cancer
      prevention trial, and the progressive divergence in incidence and
      mortality curves between
      screened and control groups indicates prolonged and continuing protection.
    In the meantime, Professor Wardle had been commissioned by the National
      Cancer Screening
      Committee to set up a `demonstration' study of an FS screening programme
      in a socio-economically
      and ethnically diverse area of North London, with FS carried out by nurse
      endoscopists. In collaboration with Professor Atkin, she modified the
      trial procedures for a
      population programme, and concurrently evaluated a range of methods for
      promoting uptake. An
      uptake rate of 55% was achieved in the pilot programme [6], and
      patient-reported outcomes were
      almost unanimously positive [7]. The Prime Minister announced in
      2010 that FS screening would
      be added to the National Bowel Cancer Screening Programme. Starting in
      March 2013, a single
      FS screening test will be offered to all adults aged 55. Professor
      Wardle's group have been
      commissioned to monitor uptake and patient-reported outcomes using methods
      developed in the
      trial. She is also collaborating in the continued follow-up of the FS
      trial participants and they expect
      to publish 15 year outcomes in 2014.
    