CaseStudyId: 23146
Title: 
    Neoadjuvant chemotherapy for invasive bladder cancer
    

ImpactDetails

    Initial results were based on 2,688 patients, from ten randomised trials,
      and updated to include 3,005 patients, from 11 trials, including the MRC
      Clinical Trials Unit BA06 trial. This represents 98% of the available
      randomised evidence. We showed that people with invasive bladder cancer
      who had multi-drug, platinum-based chemotherapy before surgery and/or
      radiotherapy lived longer than those who had just surgery and/or
      radiotherapy. After five years, 50 out of every 100 people who received
      additional chemotherapy were still alive compared with 45 out of every 100
      who just had surgery and/or radiotherapy. They were also less likely to
      have their cancer recur or spread to other parts of the body. These
      effects were independent of the whether neoadjuvant chemotherapy was added
      to surgery or radiotherapy. There was no evidence to support the use of
      neoadjuvant chemotherapy based on a single platinum-based drug.
    The research has been cited as evidence in 19 national and international
      guidelines from 2008 to 2013. In most cases, the guidelines citing this
      review substantiate their clinical recommendations by directly quoting the
      review:
    European Association of Urology (2008/2009/2010/2011/2012/2013)
      "Neoadjuvant cisplatin containing combination chemotherapy should be
      considered in muscle invasive bladder cancer irrespective of definitive
      treatment" [a].
    European Society for Medical Oncology (2008/2009/2010/2011) "A
      meta-analysis supports the use of neoadjuvant chemotherapy before
      cystectomy for T2 and T3 disease. The demonstrated survival benefit
      encourages the use of platinum based combination chemotherapy for patients
      with invasive bladder cancer before radical cystectomy or definitive
      radiotherapy" [b].
    National Comprehensive Cancer Network (2010/2011) "In the most
      recent meta-analysis, a statistically significant decrease in the death
      rate was seen corresponding to an improvement in overall survival. The
      NCCN Bladder Cancer panel members recommend considering cisplatin-based
      neoadjuvant combination chemotherapy" [c].
    Japanese Urological Association (2010) "At present, a definite
      improvement in survival rates has been shown only for preoperative
      cisplatin-based combination chemotherapy" [d].
    Associazione Urologi Italiani (2010) "High-quality clinical
      evidence shows that neoadjuvant cisplatin-based chemotherapy has
      acceptable toxicity and increases the survival rate by 5-6.5%" [e].
    Saudi Oncology Society (2011) "Neoadjuvant cisplatin-based
      chemotherapy improved overall survival by 5-7% at 5 years and this option
      should be offered to patients especially with locally advanced disease
      (T3,T4)" [f].
    Our systematic review and meta-analysis of IPD was also cited as evidence
      in these guidelines:
    British Columbia Cancer Agency (2008) [g].
    Association of Comprehensive Cancer Centres (2009) [h].
    Alberta Health Services (2011) [i].
    Spanish Society of Medical Oncology (2011) [j].
    In addition, the routine use of neoadjuvant chemotherapy in the
      management of locally advanced bladder cancer has been discussed in a
      number of recent articles. Notably, it was the topic of a panel discussion
      at the 11th Annual Meeting of the Society of Urologic Oncology,
      where the international experts concluded that the current standard of
      care for patients with muscle invasive bladder cancer is cisplatin-based
      neoadjuvant chemotherapy followed by radical surgery [k]. Use of
      neoadjuvant chemotherapy for patients with muscle-invasive bladder cancer
      has also increased. For example, a study published in 2011, which reviewed
      treatment patterns across the USA using data from the National Cancer
      Database, showed that the percentage of American patients receiving
      neoadjuvant chemotherapy had more than doubled during the period from
      2003-2007. The authors attributed this to the increase in data supporting
      neoadjuvant treatment [l].
    One of the recommendations of the IPD meta-analysis was that neoadjuvant
      cisplatin-based chemotherapy should be used as the control arm in any
      subsequent trials in this population. Whilst no recently initiated
      randomised controlled trials could be identified, neoadjuvant chemotherapy
      continues to be the subject of a number of ongoing and recently reported
      trials. These studies have explored the use of novel therapeutic agents
      (including bevacizumab, sunitinib and sorafenib) alongside standard
      neoadjuvant, cisplatin-based chemotherapy; explored modifications to the
      dose or duration of standard neoadjuvant chemotherapy regimens or used
      novel drug combinations in attempts to further reduce side effects and
      improve outcomes for patients with muscle invasive disease [m].
    
ImpactSummary

    Researchers at the MRC Clinical Trials Unit conducted a systematic review
      and meta-analysis of individual patient data on neoadjuvant chemotherapy
      for invasive bladder cancer. This work has been cited as evidence in 19
      national and international clinical practice guidelines from 2008 to 2013.
      In most cases, the guidelines citing this review substantiate their
      clinical recommendations by directly quoting the review content.
    
UnderpinningResearch

    Bladder cancer is the second most common cancer of the genitourinary
      system. Worldwide there are estimated to be about 336,000 new cases per
      year, of which about one third are likely to be invasive or metastatic
      disease.
    Invasive bladder cancer, where the tumour has spread into (or invaded)
      the muscle layer of the bladder, is likely to spread to other parts of the
      body. At the time this project was initiated, standard treatment for
      invasive bladder cancer was surgery to remove the tumour, and part or all
      of the bladder and nearby lymph nodes and other tissues. Alternatively,
      radiotherapy was also given instead of or in addition to surgery. However,
      giving (neoadjuvant) chemotherapy before surgery and/or radiotherapy
      offered the potential to reduce tumour size and control cancer spread.
      Furthermore, if chemotherapy is given before these potentially
      debilitating treatments, it might be better tolerated than chemotherapy
      given after them, so that patients are more likely to comply with their
      chemotherapy treatment, allowing higher doses of drug to be administered.
      However, most randomised trials investigating the use of neoadjuvant
      chemotherapy were modestly sized and inconclusive about its effects,
      although results of the largest trial, the MRC Clinical Trials Unit BA06
      trial looked encouraging. Subsequent systematic reviews and meta-analyses
      based on aggregate or summary data from publications of these trials were
      limited by the availability and quality of data and were similarly
      inconclusive.
    We therefore initiated a systematic review and meta-analysis of
      individual patient data (IPD). This international collaborative project
      collected and analysed the original trial data from all patients included
      in all the relevant trials, including BA06. This IPD approach can bring
      about substantial improvements to the quality of the data and analysis,
      leading to more reliable and robust results than a standard systematic
      review of summary, and is considered the `gold standard'.
    The research was carried out at the MRC Clinical Trials Unit by the
      project management group on behalf of the Advanced Bladder Cancer (ABC)
      Collaboration. This group was responsible for formulating the questions;
      developing the protocol; collecting, checking and analysing data;
      presenting and discussing the preliminary results and preparing the
      manuscript. At the time their positions at the MRC Clinical Trials Unit
      were:
    
      Claire Vale, Research Scientist (Now Senior Research Scientist)
      Jayne Tierney, Senior Research Scientist (Now Meta-analysis Group
        Lead)
      Lesley Stewart, Meta-analysis Group Head (Now Centre for Reviews and
        Dissemination Director)
      Mahesh Parmar, Cancer Group Head (Now MRC Clinical Trials Unit
        Director)
    
    An advisory group provided input and advice at all stages of the project
      (NW Clarke, UK; JT Roberts, UK; R Sylvester, Belgium; D Raghavan, USA) and
      the following supplied IPD and/or contributed to discussion of the results
      and commented on the drafts of the publication: H Abol-Enein, Egypt; P
      Bassi, Italy; AV Bono, Italy; M Boyer, Australia; ML Coppin, Canada; E
      Cortesi, Italy; PJ Goebell, Germany; S Groshen, USA; RR Hall, UK; A
      Horwich, UK; P-U Malmstr&#246;m, Sweden; JT Roberts, UK; L Sengel&#248;v, Denmark; A
      Sherif, Sweden; M Stockle, Germany; FM Torti, USA; DMA Wallace, UK).
    