CaseStudyId: 23147
Title: 
    Improving policy for sexual and reproductive health
    

ImpactDetails

    Our review of chlamydia control activities in Europe was commissioned by
      the European Centre for Disease Control and Prevention (ECDC) to inform
      development of its policy. The resulting policy document, ECDC Guidance on
      Chlamydia Control in Europe 2009 [a], states that the guidance was
      developed by a technical expert group using the evidence gathered in the
      EU report "Review of chlamydia control activities in EU countries" [b]
      and systematic review of the effectiveness of chlamydia screening [6,
        above]. It provides guidance to health policy makers in the EU about
      national strategies for chlamydia control.
    The systematic review of chlamydia screening was commissioned by NICE to
      inform its guidance [c]. Our findings indicated that there was a
      lack of evidence from randomised trials to show the effectiveness of
      chlamydia screening and the final NICE Guidance made no recommendations
      about chlamydia screening except for more robust research to examine the
      effectiveness of different screening approaches [d]. This
      recommendation contributed to decisions to fund two large randomised
      trials &#8212; one in the Netherlands of a register based screening programme
      and one in Australia of an opportunistic screening programme. The research
      in the Netherlands concluded "There was no statistical evidence of an
        impact on chlamydia positivity rates or estimated population prevalence
        from the Chlamydia Screening Implementation programme after three years
        at the participation levels obtained. The current evidence does not
        support a national roll out of this register based chlamydia screening
        programme" [e]. The systematic review had a persistent
      influence on development of chlamydia screening policy nationally and
      internationally.
    Our research into chlamydia screening had wide impact, as it contributed,
      through informed and constructive criticism, to public debate about the
      National Chlamydia Screening Programme (NCSP) in England and its future
      direction. Stephenson presented insights gained from the research to the
      annual NCSP meeting (2007) and to the Independent Advisory Group at the
      House of Lords (2008) [f]. She was among the experts who gave
      evidence at interview to the National Audit Office for their report on
      value for money of the NCSP (NAO 2009). She highlighted that since the
      NCSP did not use unique identifiers or collect any clinical outcome data,
      it was not able to evaluate its aims. The NAO report cites both our review
      of chlamydia control activities in EU countries and the subsequent ECDC
      Guidance on chlamydia control in Europe [g]. It concluded that the
      delivery of the NCSP had not demonstrated value for money. In accordance
      with our research findings, it stated that "due to uncertainties in the
        scientific evidence on chlamydia, the Department does not know how often
        infection leads to serious health problems and hence whether it is
        cost-effective to invest so much public money in tackling this problem."
      The NAO Report was swiftly followed by a highly critical report from the
      Public Accounts Committee (2009-2010) [h]. In response to this
      criticism, the NCSP focused on chlamydia testing in sexual health services
      and primary care and has ceased screening in low risk groups that
      identifies fewer positive cases [i]. These and other
      organisational changes are expected to substantially improve value for
      money. Between 2003 and 2009, c.&#163;100m was spent delivering the programme [h]
      and cost savings on reconfiguration are expected to be considerable: "The
        average cost per chlamydia screening episode (including follow up of
        positive clients, overheads and local coordination) was found to be
        &#163;45... An estimated cost of &#163;33 per screening episode should be
        achievable, as screening volumes increase, chlamydia screening is better
        integrated in all community sexual health pathways, sexual health
        networks develop and regions move to collaborative procurement" [j].
    While mathematical models tend to predict that screening will reduce the
      prevalence of infection, there is currently no empirical evidence from the
      NCSP to demonstrate a fall in prevalence. The latest (April 2013) update
      on the National Chlamydia Screening Programme acknowledges the gaps in
      current knowledge that our research highlighted and describes a new policy
      of re-focusing chlamydia testing within health services, moving away from
      population-based screening with coverage targets [k].
    Reflecting on changes in chlamydia screening policy, Stephenson was
      invited to present a plenary debate at the world congress of sexually
      transmitted infections (Vienna, July 2013) on whether to abandon
      population based chlamydia screening of asymptomatic young women [l].
    
ImpactSummary

    Research by Professor Judith Stephenson and colleagues at the UCL
      Institute of Women's Health into the effectiveness of chlamydia screening
      has led to guidance to health policy makers in the EU about national
      strategies for chlamydia control, and has influenced NICE guidelines on
      the subject. In particular, our work has informed debate on the value for
      money of the National Chlamydia Screening Programme (NCSP). Stephenson
      advised the National Audit Office on this topic, and a resulting report
      led to the NCSP focusing on chlamydia testing in sexual health services
      and primary care rather than screening in low risk groups. These changes
      are expected to make considerable cost savings to the NHS.
    
UnderpinningResearch

    Our early research evaluated new molecular diagnostics for diagnosis of
      genital chlamydia infection (nucleic acid amplification tests) which
      compared favourably with the standard method (enzyme immunoassay) of the
      day [1]. We then examined the feasibility of patients taking their
      own samples (vaginal swabs) in a sexual health clinic compared with
      clinicians taking cervical samples and showed that patient-taken samples
      were acceptable to women and appropriately sensitive for the new molecular
      diagnostics [2]. We went on to show the feasibility of women and
      men taking their own samples outside the clinic setting in response to a
      screening invitation sent to their home address and posting the samples to
      a laboratory for chlamydia testing [3]. Together, these three
      studies, in addition to baseline prevalence studies from Natsal [see
        case study UCL02-JOH] were instrumental to the
      rapid expansion and uptake of chlamydia testing in England. At the same
      time, we made a strong case, based on review of the limited evidence base,
      for the cost-effectiveness of chlamydia screening to be evaluated through
      randomised trials before proceeding with implementation of a national
      screening programme [4].
    A systematic survey of chlamydia control activities in 29 European
      countries was carried out 2006-2008, funded by the European Centre for
      Disease Control and Prevention (ECDC). Stephenson collaborated with
      Professor Nicola Low (PI, Bern University) on designing the survey and led
      the work in the UK, including investigation of the National Chlamydia
      Screening Programme (NCSP) as a case study. The survey showed wide
      variation in the organisation of chlamydia control, with almost half of
      the countries reporting no organised activity and national control
      programmes in two countries. We outlined four levels for chlamydia control
      programmes: Level A primary prevention, Level B case management, Level C
      opportunistic testing, Level D screening programme and recommended a
      step-by-step approach to ensure that accurate STI prevention and patient
      management are in place before complex interventions such as screening are
      considered, particularly as evidence for the impact of level C and D
      programmes is lacking [5].
    The early research described above sparked considerable debate and in
      2006, Low's team and Stephenson were commissioned by NICE to carry out a
      review of the effectiveness of chlamydia screening [6]. We
      included 91 studies (5 systematic reviews or guidelines, 10 randomised
      trials, 2 non-randomised trials, one time series and 73 prospective
      studies) and produced multiple evidence statements to inform the NICE
      guidance. We found a lack of evidence to support chlamydia screening in
      the general population aged less than 25 and called for high-quality
      trials of screening with clinical outcome measures to determine the
      balance and harms of chlamydia screening [7].
    