CaseStudyId: 23454
Title: 
    Inborn errors of metabolism: diagnosis and treatment
    

ImpactDetails

    MCADD
    Our demonstration of an automatable method for MCADD screening and the
      resulting benefits to patients contributed to a decision to undertake a
      pilot study of MCADD screening (UKCSNS-MCADD) which was co-ordinated by
      the MRC Centre of Epidemiology for Child Health at the UCL Institute of
      Child Health, London [a]. This pilot study showed good results,
      and so MCADD screening was adopted in England in 2009 and Wales in 2012
      using our methods [b]. Since screening began, we can estimate
      (based on epidemiology in ref 2 above) that around 60 lives have been
      saved and around 60 cases of long-term disability prevented. One such
      example was recently highlighted on the Great Ormond Street Hospital
      website &#8212; the parents of a child identified by screening could be given
      specialist dietary advice and training on what to do in an emergency [c].
    Fabry disease
    Our CTH method has been adapted for screening programmes. For example,
      screening of 172,000 newborns in Taiwan identified 89 infants with low
      activity of the Fabry enzyme; these infants were further assessed using
      our urine CTH method [d]. Enzyme replacement therapy (ERT) has
      been approved by for the treatment of Fabry disease, and early treatment
      can help to avoid complications. As well as contributing to early
      diagnosis, our tests provide early evidence of the success of ERT by
      falling levels of CTH in the urine. We are commissioned to test urine
      samples from patients receiving enzyme replacement therapy by one of the
      companies producing the enzyme (Genzyme). Between 2008 and 2013 we
      analysed 760 samples per year. Income from the CTH tests (&#163;37,000 p.a.)
      and other tests undertaken in our laboratories (&#163;41,000 p.a.) contributes
      to maintenance of equipment and funds further method development [e].
    Movement disorders
    Our diagnostic tests and new treatments for movement disorders are now in
      use in clinical practice. The treatment we devised for genetically
      determined manganese build-up dramatically alleviated symptoms of
      parkinsonism or dystonia in four sufferers during the period 2008-13 [f].
      This work was featured on the website of the European Parkinson's Disease
      Association [g].
    As a result of our work on Aromatic Amino Acid Decarboxylase Deficiency
      (AADC), diagnostic tests are now available [h]. Without our
      research all the families on this website would have no diagnosis for
      their child's extremely debilitating disorder. Now those that have not
      responded to drugs are likely to be able to have gene therapy in a joint
      UK/US venture. Our work on diagnosis of AADC is featured on the AADC
      Research Trust website [i].
    Epilepsy
    Our research on epilepsy has resulted in new diagnostic tests and better
      treatment for infants and children now in use. We perform diagnostic tests
      on 230 urine samples and 46 DNA samples per year, sent to us from
      paediatricians looking after infants and children with severe epilepsy
      around the country. Between 2008 and 2013, we identified the genetic
      biochemical defect in 35 children (14 with pyridoxine 5'-phosphate oxidase
      (PNPO) deficiency; 21 with antiquitin deficiency). These are potentially
      fatal disorders. They respond poorly to antiepileptic drugs but respond
      very well to high doses of vitamin B6 as pyridoxine or pyridoxal
      phosphate. Our diagnostic test thus enables more successful treatment to
      be given. [e]
    Our research was quoted in a recent guideline on treatment of neonatal
      seizures [j]. Referencing [5] above, along with another
      publication from our group, the guidelines recommend: "Most cases of
        pyridoxine-dependent epilepsy are due to alpha-aminoadipic semialdehyde
        dehydrogenase (also known as antiquitin, or ATQ) deficiency, an
        autosomal recessive inborn error of metabolism caused by defects in the
        ALDH7A1 gene that lead to accumulation of alpha-AASA. Mutation analysis
        of the ALDH7A1 gene is recommended in patients with abnormal biochemical
        screening and/or clear evidence of pyridoxine or folinic acid
        responsiveness."
    Progressive liver disease
    Our research on progressive liver disease means that children can now be
      given bile acid replacement therapy for an increasing number of bile acid
      synthesis disorders, preventing death from liver disease or the need for a
      liver transplant [k]. We analyse samples from patients presenting
      with cholestatic liver disease in the UK and overseas (280 samples, 4
      treatable positives per year). For the period 2008-13, this equates to 24
      lives saved / transplants avoided. In 2011, a bile acid preparation,
      Orphacol, was licensed by the European Medicines Agency for the treatment
      of inborn errors in primary bile acid synthesis. In the submission, they
      state that: "The literature provided by the applicant showed that, where
      available to investigators, the clinical use of cholic acid has been
      documented since at least the mid-1990s through the work primarily
      conducted by the Jacquemin, Clayton and Setchell groups". The document
      references 10 of our papers [l].
    
ImpactSummary

    Investigators at UCL have developed new diagnostic tests, new treatments
      and new methods for monitoring treatment of inborn errors of metabolism.
      Certain of these tests are now used to screen all newborns in the UK, all
      infants with liver disease and all infants with drug-resistant epilepsy.
      This is improving outcome for &gt;120 UK children per year. For
      untreatable disorders, prenatal tests prevent the birth of a second
      affected child in the family.
    
UnderpinningResearch

    Inborn errors of metabolism are genetic disorders characterised by a
      defective protein that disturbs an important metabolic pathway. Inborn
      errors of metabolism are individually rare but collectively common
      diseases, and can cause a very wide range of symptoms and signs from liver
      disease to convulsions to movement disorders to loss of consciousness on
      fasting.
    MCADD
      Medium-chain acyl-CoA dehydrogenase deficiency (MCADD) is a rare genetic
      condition in which a person has problems breaking down fatty acids for
      energy. It affects around 1 in 10,000 babies born in the UK each year, and
      is life-threatening if not discovered early, as any drop in an affected
      baby's blood sugar levels can result in severe illness or death. In 1998,
      working with Micromass UK Ltd, we showed that electrospray ionisation
      tandem mass spectrometry could be used to measure octanoylcarnitine in
      blood spots thus providing the basis for an automatable method for
      screening for MCADD [1]. We showed that once MCADD had been
      diagnosed and appropriately managed, the prognosis was excellent (whereas
      in undiagnosed patients the mortality was 20-25% and a further 20% of
      children were left disabled) [2].
    Fabry disease
      Fabry disease is a rare lysosomal storage disorder, affecting around 1 in
      58,000 individuals. The condition has serious complications including
      severe neuropathic pain, renal failure, cardiomyopathy and coronary artery
      disease, and strokes. Patients often die prematurely as a result of these
      complications. In 2002 we published a new method for determination of
      ceramide trihexoside (CTH) in plasma and urine of patients with Fabry
      disease [3]. Such measurements have proved useful in monitoring
      enzyme replacement therapy. This method is now the gold standard test for
      the screening and monitoring of enzyme replacement throughout the UK and
      worldwide.
    Movement disorders
      We were the first to show, in 1993, that parkinsonism in infants can be
      caused by a disorder affecting the synthesis of dopamine (aromatic amino
      acid decarboxylase [AADC] deficiency); some affected patients have shown a
      good response to dopamine agonists and monoamine oxidase inhibitors, and
      new treatments have been developed by ourselves and others which build on
      our early work [4]. We have also shown that dystonia in older
      children can be caused by a disorder leading to the build-up of manganese
      in the brain [5]. This disorder can be effectively treated with a
      manganese chelator and iron supplementation. We developed tests for
      dopamine and serotonin metabolites in cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) (for
      diagnosis of AADC) and we found the gene responsible for the manganese
      disorder, thereby providing a genetic test. Overall, this work has led to
      the development of useful diagnostic tests and new treatments for children
      and adults with movement disorders.
    Epilepsy
      In 2005 we identified the genetic defect responsible for a severe seizure
      disorder in infancy which we had previously shown could be treated
      effectively with pyridoxal phosphate (the active form of vitamin B6). In
      2006 we showed that severe seizures in the newborn that respond to
      treatment with pyridoxine (another form of vitamin B6) could be due to
      another genetic defect (antiquitin deficiency) [6].
    Progressive liver disease
      We have shown that liver disease in infancy and neurological disease in
      older children and adults can be caused by disorders of bile acid
      synthesis and these disorders can respond extremely well to bile acid
      replacement therapy. Without treatment children can progress to cirrhosis
      and liver failure [7].
    