CaseStudyId: 26479
Title: 
    Development of new treatments for uveitis
    

ImpactDetails

    Our research over the last 15 years has developed new local and systemic
      treatments for uveitis, and these have become standard practice. Our work
      has introduced new treatments where none existed, specifically patients
      with uveitis that is not responsive to steroid therapy or in which steroid
      therapy is contraindicated because of adverse effects. For these patients,
      treatment with mycophenolate or intraocular methotrexate may be
      sight-saving. In other patients, as a result of these treatments, vision
      has been restored and the dose of systemic steroids reduced or stopped
      completely. MMF is now the major second-line drug used in management of
      uveitis. Our demonstration of its effectiveness in 1999 was key in
      bringing the potential of this drug to the attention of the inflammatory
      eye disease community. Our study was also quoted in US guidelines in 2000
      [a] and provided the impetus for several additional studies over
      the years (e.g. Teoh et al 2008 [b]). A recent review of the
      management of uveitis demonstrates that the use of MMF is established
      practice [c].
    A further recent article states: "Antimetabolites now enjoy favor as a
        first choice of treatment with IMT [immunomodulatory therapy] in most
        cases of posterior uveitis." Two of the key drugs used are MMF and
      MTX [d]. The importance of MMF and MTX as treatments for uveitis
      is further emphasised by a recently commenced clinical trial that compares
      the two agents as first line therapy for steroid unresponsive uveitis [e].
    Robust data concerning the numbers of patients affected globally by
      uveitis where steroids are either ineffective or toxic are not available.
      However, from our own institution MMF is the major drug used with steroids
      in about 80% of these patients [f].
    Cystoid macular oedema is a particularly challenging complication of
      uveitis and is the most common cause of blindness and visual impairment in
      chronic uveitis patients occurring in up to one third. Our studies have
      contributed greatly to the present best practice in the management of this
      condition. We demonstrated that vision could be improved by injecting TA
      into the eye where systemic and periocular medication had failed. This led
      to a profusion of papers on TA and then to the longer acting intraocular
      steroids being developed. Our research also introduced intraocular
      methotrexate as a successful treatment option for macular oedema in
      patients who cannot have intraocular steroids. A recent review notes the
      use of both intraocular TA and methotrexate in the management of uveitic
      cystoid macular oedema. Regarding the former, it notes that "intravitreal
        triamcinolone (various formulations) is commonly used for CME" [g].
      A number of studies are cited, of which ours was notably the first and
      largest. Our paper on intraocular methotrexate is also cited in both this
      review, and another from India in 2013 [h].
    A further complication of uveitis is glaucoma, which developes in up to
      20% of patients. Prior to our research, ocular hypotensive prostaglandin
        analogues had been used successfully in primary open angle glaucoma
      but there was major concern about their use in uveitis patients. Our study
      allowed these very effective drops to be brought into the management of
      uveitic glaucoma and reduced the need for surgery [i].
    Our demonstration in 2011 that anti-TNF drugs can reduce the risk
      of visual loss in patients with Behcet's disease, who have the worst
      visual prognosis of all patients with uveitis, is now being quoted
      worldwide in support of this treatment [j].
    
ImpactSummary

    Research at the UCL Institute of Ophthalmology over the last 15 years has
      developed new treatments for management of uveitis and its
      sight-threatening complications, which have subsequently become standard
      practice. Our work, in previously untreatable disease, has allowed
      restoration of vision in many patients and prevention of further visual
      loss in others. Many patients have been able to reduce systemic
      medication, limiting adverse effects of treatment.
    
UnderpinningResearch

    Uveitis is an uncommon eye condition, which affects two to five in every
      10,000 people in the UK every year. Although rare, it is a leading cause
      of visual impairment in patients of working age. Chronic uveitis is
      associated with a high incidence of vision-threatening complications such
      as cataract, macular oedema, and, most importantly, glaucoma, which may
      cause irreversible visual loss. Research at UCL, over the last 15 years,
      has developed new treatments for uveitis and its complications.
    In 1999 we assessed the usefulness of mycophenolate mofetil (MMF), an
      immunosuppressant used extensively in transplant medicine, but not
      previously used in uveitis. Our findings indicated that MMF was a useful
      immunosuppressive drug for controlling ocular inflammation [1]; it
      proved to be more effective with fewer adverse effects than other drugs
      used to treat uveitis (ciclosporin and methotrexate).
    Further to this, in 2001 we undertook a pilot study in six patients with
      idiopathic uveitis complicated by visually significant cystoid macular
      oedema (CMO) that was resistant to periocular and/or systemic
      corticosteroid treatment. We demonstrated that one injection into the eye
      of the steroid triamcinolone (TA) was an effective short-term treatment
      for resistant CMO in uveitis [2]. This paper changed the way that
      refractory macular oedema was considered in uveitis. Previously it was
      thought that oedema was refractory because permanent blood-retinal barrier
      breakdown had occurred. By demonstrating that vision could be improved by
      injecting TA into the eye where previous systemic and periocular
      medication had failed, the research had shown that oedema was reversible
      using this method of steroid delivery. A larger study in 2005 confirmed
      these findings, showing that in patients with uveitic CMO, intravitreal TA
      can effectively reduce CMO and improve visual acuity. In some patients it
      allows the cessation and/or major reduction of systemic immunosuppressive
      therapy [3]. For the first time, previously incurable visual loss
      could now be treated, resulting in vision gain and subsequent improvement
      in the quality of life for patients. This led to a profusion of papers on
      TA and then to the licensing of longer acting intraocular steroids, now a
      NICE-approved therapy.
    In 2009 we undertook a study to determine whether the use of topical
      prostaglandin (PG) analogues to treat raised intraocular pressure (IOP) in
      patients with uveitis resulted in an increase in uveitis reactivation or
      CMO. This was thought likely and these drops were then contraindicated in
      uveitis. We demonstrated that PG analogues are potent topical medications
      for lowering raised IOP in patients with uveitis and are not associated
      with an increased risk of CMO or uveitis reactivation [4]. The
      study allowed these very effective drops to be brought into the management
      of uveitic glaucoma and reduced the need for surgery to prevent visual
      loss.
    In the same year we undertook a pilot study in 15 patients to evaluate
      the use of intravitreal methotrexate (MTX) for the treatment of uveitis
      and uveitic CMO as an alternative to intravital steroids. We showed that
      in these patients, intravitreal MTX can improve visual acuity and reduce
      CMO and, in some patients, allows the reduction of immunosuppressive
      therapy [5]. This study introduced intraocular methotrexate as a
      successful treatment option for macular oedema in patients who cannot have
      intraocular steroids &#8212; this led to an international series and widespread
      use and for the first time offered a non-steroid intraocular treatment
      regime for those in whom periocular/intraocular steroids are
      contraindicated. Many of these patients were able to come off systemic
      therapy as a result with good vision maintained.
    Most recently, we assessed the visual prognosis of patients with ocular
      Beh&#231;et disease, who have the worst visual prognosis of all patients with
      uveitis, to determine factors predictive of visual loss and severe visual
      loss. These patients are all young and both eyes are usually affected. We
      showed that the use of anti-TNF-&#945; drugs was associated with a
      statistically significant reduction in the rate of severe visual loss,
      with a greatly reduced risk of visual loss at 5 and 10 years [6].
      This has led to the early introduction of biologics for treatment in these
      patients.
    