CaseStudyId: 26519
Title: 
    Advances in gene therapy lead to successful treatment of haemophilia
    

ImpactDetails

    Haemophilia B patients have a defective factor IX gene and cannot make
      the protein factor IX, which is essential for normal blood clot formation.
      They suffer from frequent, often life-threatening, bleeding episodes that
      occur without any apparent injury. Current treatment involves injection of
      factor IX protein concentrates every two to three days for the life-time
      of the patient. This treatment is invasive, extremely expensive (&#163;150,000
      per year) and only available to 20% of the world's haemophilia patients
      who live in high income countries. Importantly, this treatment is not
      curative and patients continue to bleed despite prophylactic factor IX
      treatment which by necessity is administered intermittently, resulting in
      significant periods when the plasma level is below 1% of normal.
    Gene therapy overcomes these limitations by replacing the damaged factor
      IX gene with a normal copy, thus allowing the patient to make factor IX
      protein continuously without the need for regular injections. Our recent
      study showed that a single injection of our novel AAV vector into six
      patients with severe haemophilia B resulted in an increase in blood FIX
      levels from undetectable levels before gene therapy to between 1-6% of
      normal in all participants for a period that now extends to over three
      years.
    Four of the six patients have been able to stop regular injections with
      FIX protein and still remain free of spontaneous bleeding episodes. This
      is despite engaging in activities such as playing football and running a
      marathon that had previously been associated with bleeding. The first
      patient commented "This type of solution is something permanent and can
        make a lot of difference". The sixth patient said "I have not
        needed any of my normal treatment, either preventative or on-demand as a
        result of an injury. Previously, I used to infuse at home three times a
        week .... I play football, run and take part in triathlons &#8212; and
        previously I might have had to infuse both before I took part and
        possibly after as well. Not having to do that has been absolutely
        brilliant" [a].
    This, the first gene therapy success for haemophilia in the world, has
      been lauded by experts in the field [b]. The results have been
      widely covered by the media, including the BBC and the New York Times
      amongst other news outlets across the world [c]. It has also been
      covered on patient-facing websites [c].
    There has been a significant saving to the NHS just from the first six
      patients treated through reduction or elimination of the need for FIX
      protein concentrates, amounting to more than &#163;1.5m, a figure which
      increases with each month that passes. This approach has recently been
      extended to four more patients who were all treated at the high dose level
      and are expressing factor IX at 5-8% level over a follow-up period of 9-18
      months.
    Indeed, the same approach is now being developed by Nathwani and
      Tuddenham for haemophilia A, the most common severe inherited bleeding
      disorder affecting approximately 1 in 5,000 males. Patents for the novel
      factor VIII expression cassette has been filed [e] and recently
      licensed to BioMarin for [text removed for publication] [f].
      This development is prompting increased investment in research, and is
      accelerating clinical trials for gene therapy of haemophilia A. [text
        removed for publication].
    
ImpactSummary

    Haemophilia, an inherited bleeding disease, is treated by frequent and
      extremely expensive infusions of recombinant versions of the missing
      factors. Advances in gene therapy have now been achieved at UCL, with
      successful treatment of Haemophilia B in 10 severely affected patients.
      The novel factor IX expression cassette has been patented and licensed to
      an industrial partner (UniQure). Savings to the NHS in excess of &#163;1.5m
      have already been made and increase every month. Pre-clinical advances
      have also been made in Haemophilia A, and the factor VIII expression
      cassette has been patented and licensed to an industrial partner
      (BioMarin).
    
UnderpinningResearch

    Haemophilia is an inherited deficiency of one of the clotting factors
      that achieve haemostasis and prevent uncontrolled bleeding. Since the
      cloning of the factor VIII gene, which involved a seminal contribution
      from Professor Edward Tuddenham at the UCL Cancer Institute, and the later
      cloning of other clotting factor genes, the standard treatment for
      haemophilia has been with the infusion of recombinant versions of the
      missing factor. This approach is very expensive to the NHS (&#163;400m per
      annum) and beyond the means of 80% of patients living in the developing
      world.
    In 1999, Tuddenham began a collaboration with Dr Amit Nathwani (also UCL
      Cancer Institute) to develop gene therapy for Haemophilia A and B with the
      intention of overcoming this problem and providing improved disease
      control. The initial studies focussed on Haemophilia B (factor IX
      deficiency) because the factor IX gene is smaller than the factor VIII
      gene and is easier to package. Extensive iterative preclinical studies
      performed in collaboration with St Jude Children's Research Hospital, in
      Memphis, TN, USA led to highly improved in vivo delivery and expression of
      the factor IX gene in mice and then in primates. This was achieved by
      incremental technical modifications including codon optimisation of the
      factor IX gene, the development of a self-complementary gene construct
      and design of a small tissue specific promoter [1, 2].
    Good Manufacturing Practice protocols for vector purification were
      developed and in 2010 studies in patients commenced [3]. In the
      initial report, the vector was infused at one of 3 doses into the
      peripheral vein of six severely affected haemophilia B patients with
      baseline factor IX activity &lt;1% of normal. Stable adeno-associated
      virus (AAV)-mediated endogenous expression of factor IX at 2-6% of normal
      levels was observed in all participants for a period of at least three
      years (follow-up still on-going). Four additional subjects were recruited
      in 2012 at the high dose level and they have stable expression of factor
      IX at 5% of normal.
    Building on the expertise developed during the haemophilia B work, a new
      expression cassette for factor VIII has been designed that overcomes the
      size barrier to incorporation in AAV and also allows highly efficient
      synthesis compared to all previous expression vectors [4, 5].
      Final pre-clinical toxicology studies are now ongoing to support a Phase
      I/II trial of factor VIII gene transfer for Haemophilia A.
    