CaseStudyId: 26549
Title: 
    Management of systemic sclerosis - better follow up, risk stratification
      and use of immunosuppression
    

ImpactDetails

    The last 20 years has seen a significant improvement in outcome for
      patients with scleroderma, and specifically an increase in survival, much
      of it attributable to research from our centre. We have more than 2,000
      cases, seen over the past 20 years, where we have explored the change in
      outcome over time and also used the uniquely well-characterised patient
      cohort to define timing and frequency of each of the major
      life-threatening complications of the disease. Our SSc cohort saw
      approximately 20 fewer deaths in 2010 compared to 1994. In addition, by
      avoiding unnecessary high dose immunosuppression there were 10% fewer
      hospital admissions for infection 2005-10 compared with 1990) [a].
    Defining subsets of SSc to improve treatment
    The biomarkers we have described have enabled better prediction of
      complications such as scleroderma renal crisis and lung fibrosis, and
      identified subsets that benefit from more aggressive treatment. As a
      result of our definition of hallmark SSc antibodies associated with lung
      fibrosis and scleroderma renal disease, these tests are now routinely used
      in risk assessment of SSc worldwide. They have been incorporated into new
      classification criteria for SSc issued by the American College of
      Rheumatology (ACR) the European League Against Rheumatism (EULAR) in 2013,
      to which we contributed [b]. This permits more effective patient
      education and earlier engagement with other specialised hospital services.
    Defining the use of immunosuppression
    We have defined the cases of lung fibrosis in scleroderma that are most
      likely to benefit from immunosuppression and developed a simple staging
      system for lung fibrosis that is now used in most centres in UK and abroad
      and has been validated in two independent studies in the USA [c]
      and Australia. This helps to avoid use of toxic immunosuppression in cases
      of SSc where this is unnecessary and enables us to target
      immunosuppressive therapy to more severe cases who gain the most benefit.
      This is a result of our definition of "good prognosis" cases of SSc. A
      logical extension of this work is more effective enrichment of clinical
      trial cohorts to allow smaller sample size and improved study design. Our
      approach using cyclophosphamide is incorporated into the European
      recommendations for treatment of SSc [d] and is now effectively
      standard of care for SSc cases worldwide [e].
    Defining the importance of regular proactive screening of cases
    As a result of our research, regular screening for pulmonary
      complications (lung fibrosis and pulmonary hypertension) has become
      standard in the management of SSc. This is now adopted in all European
      scleroderma centres and incorporated in recommendations for international
      societies including the European Society of Cardiology (ESC) and European
      Respiratory Society (ERS) [f] and the Expert Panel on Outcomes
      Measures in PAH related to Systemic Sclerosis (EPOSS) [g]. As a
      result, historically poor outcomes have been positively impacted [h].
    In conclusion, our work has impacted on overall outcome in SSc,
      appropriate follow up and screening of cases and use of broad-spectrum
      immunosuppression in appropriate cases and has helped to define current
      standards of care for a disease with high medical burden and the highest
      case-specific mortality of any rheumatic condition.
    
ImpactSummary

    Systemic sclerosis (SSc) is an important, but uncommon, connective tissue
      disease with high mortality and has a major non-lethal morbidity. Research
      at UCL has been instrumental in defining modern management of SSc and has
      contributed in three main ways. First we have defined the importance of
      regular proactive screening of cases, secondly we have defined the use of
      immunosuppression and thirdly we have delineated important clinical and
      laboratory subsets of SSc that underpin an individualised (or
      personalised) approach to assessment and treatment. These topics exemplify
      stepwise progress in management of SSc that also has direct relevance to
      other more common medical conditions.
    
UnderpinningResearch

    From 1993, under the direction of Carol Black, then from 2006 under Chris
      Denton and David Abraham, the Centre for Rheumatology and Connective
      Tissue Diseases at UCL pioneered translational research in scleroderma. We
      recognised the value of systematic collection of bio-samples and careful
      cataloguing of longitudinal clinical data related to a unique cohort of
      patients. Thus we have data spanning 20 years on more than 2,000 cases &#8212;
      the largest single centre cohort in Europe and equal to any in the world.
      This resource has been used to identify key targets for therapy and define
      novel pathogenic mechanisms. We were the first to describe altered
      chemokine expression in SSc and these observations delineated key
      mechanisms of immunopathogenesis [1].
    In addition we have discovered factors that predict future deterioration
      of skin, lung or other organ-based complications of SSc. These are
      landmark studies that have been adopted as standard of care across many
      centres internationally. We have pioneered the use of skin score
      trajectory as a way of stratifying SSc cases [2]. Work led by
      Denton has enabled more informative recruitment into clinical trials, to
      make these studies more robust and also to help focus resources and
      therapies appropriately. In a landmark study we showed that regular
      screening and a proactive strategy significantly improved survival in
      diffuse SSc [3]. Our work on SSc-specific autoantibodies has used
      the unique resource of our large cohort of cases to define associations
      that are durable through the course of disease and permit more
      individualised risk stratification of SSc cases at diagnosis so that
      treatment and investigation is targeted more effectively. Our research
      defined hallmark SSc antibodies associated with lung fibrosis
      (anti-topoisomerase-1; ATA) and scleroderma renal disease (anti-RNA
      polymerase-III; ARA) [4].
    Our centre conducted the first major prospective controlled study
      comparing intravenous cyclophosphamide with placebo for lung fibrosis
      complicating SSc [5]. As a result of this research, our treatment
      protocol using intravenous cyclophosphamide has been adopted by most
      centres in USA and Europe. Together with the Royal Brompton Hospital, we
      have helped to define those cases that are at risk of progression and
      developed and validated a simple data-driven staging system of disease
      severity [6]. This was independently validated by data from a
      large North American trial, the scleroderma lung study. In a related study
      we used an observational design to complete one of the largest prospective
      evaluations of immunosuppression in SSc skin disease, focusing on the more
      severe diffuse subset of the disease [7]. This UK observational
      study recruited nearly 150 cases of dcSSc, more than half from our centre,
      and evaluated immunosuppressive therapies including mycophenolate mofetil,
      cyclophosphamide, methotrexate and anti-thymocyte globulin. This study was
      a landmark initiative as it demonstrated that protocolised approaches with
      standardised observation, analogous to oncology strategies, could be used
      to explore best therapies for SSc, a condition with outcome worse than
      many malignancies.
    