CaseStudyId: 26546
Title: 
    B cell depletion: an effective therapy in rheumatoid arthritis
    

ImpactDetails

    As a result of the research described above, rituximab is now in
      widespread use as a treatment for RA, with usage rising every year [a].
      By the end of July 2013, Roche estimated that 228,801 patients have been
      treated with rituximab for RA [b].
    In March 2006, the FDA approved rituximab for use in combination with
      methotrexate in adult patients with moderately to severely active RA who
      have had an inadequate response to anti-TNF&#945; therapy. Approval by the
      European Medicines Agency (EMA) came in July of the same year. Towards the
      end of 2006, a consensus statement and guidance document on the use of
      rituximab for routine care of patients with RA was issued by the European
      League Against Rheumatism (EULAR), describing the treatment as "a major
      advance in the therapeutic armamentarium for patients with rheumatoid
      arthritis" [c].
    In 2007, NICE issued guidance (updated in 2011) recommending rituximab as
      follows:
    Rituximab in combination with methotrexate is recommended as an option
        for the treatment of adults with severe active rheumatoid arthritis who
        have had an inadequate response to, or have an intolerance of, other
        disease-modifying anti-rheumatic drugs (DMARDs), including at least one
        tumour necrosis factor (TNF) inhibitor [d].
    British Society for Rheumatology (BSR) and British Health Professionals
      in Rheumatology (BHPR) issued further guidelines on the use of rituximab
      in 2010 [e]. Rituximab was also recommended in guidelines issued
      by the American College of Rheumatology (ACR) in 2008, updated in 2012 [f].
    Benefits to patients
    The use of rituximab extends treatment to those patients who cannot have
      anti-TNF&#945; drugs because of contra-indications (a history of cancer or
      pre-malignant conditions and patients with history of recurrent and/or
      serious infections or considered to be at a high risk of infection). Data
      from a collaboration of different European registries shows that 36% of
      patients received rituximab as first-line biologic [g].
    Rituximab is also indicated as a second line treatment for patients where
      anti-TNF&#945; drugs failed, and this amounts to between 30 and 40% of patients
      that are considered for biologic therapy. One patient, for whom three
      anti-TNF&#945; drugs had failed, described the impact of rituximab as follows:
    "Blood tests showed that my levels of inflammation were the lowest
        that they'd been for years. I was less tired and had more mental and
        physical energy. I resumed several of my hobbies... Mabthera transformed
        my life... the effects have been radical. I can truthfully say that I
        haven't experienced this level of wellbeing for many years" [h].
    A major advantage of rituximab is that it can be given as two infusions
      two weeks apart (or four smaller weekly injections), with effects
      persisting for 6-12 months thereafter. From the patient's perspective,
      this is a more convenient schedule of administration than other biologics
      (typically administered 12-24 times per year). Furthermore, as the UCL
      team and others have demonstrated, rituximab infusions can be repeated on
      an annual basis for several years. Loss of response to rituximab in
      patients with RA that have previously responded well is rare, and it is
      well tolerated with excellent safety profiles in RA and in patients with
      many other conditions [i].
    Economic impacts
    Rituximab costs &#163;5,000 per annum less than other biologics. In the UK it
      is generally the next choice before other more expensive alternatives such
      as tocilizumab, abatacept or belimumab. Use in patients in this setting
      has already generated considerable savings to the NHS. The economic impact
      of rituximab has been greater in low and middle income countries (for
      example, Brazil) where the lower cost of rituximab makes it the first-line
      biologic for RA [j].
    Use of rituximab in other conditions
    The success of B cell depletion therapy in RA has led directly to it
      being used for autoimmune rheumatic diseases (such as systemic lupus
      erythematosus, ANCA associated vasculitis, Behcets syndrome, myositis,
      anti-phospholipid syndrome, Sjogren's syndrome, neuromyelitis optica).
      Rituximab is licensed for ANCA-associated vasculitis [k], is
      approved for funding by NHS England for SLE [l], and has been
      nationally commissioned for the treatment of Behcets disease [m]
      and neuromyelitis optica [n].
    
ImpactSummary

    Research at UCL pioneered B cell depletion to treat rheumatoid arthritis
      (RA) and also stimulated the development of B-cell-directed therapies for
      other autoimmune rheumatic, haematological and neurological diseases. Now
      NICE approved, B cell depletion (based on rituximab) in RA is as effective
      as the alternative (anti-TNF&#945; drugs) and an option for patients unable to
      gain benefit from anti-TNF&#945; drugs. Rituximab offers drug-cost savings of
      up to &#163;5,000/annum/patient and for many is a more convenient therapy,
      being given as an infusion only every five months apart, or more. B cell
      depletion has also proved to have an excellent safety profile, with many
      receiving repeated courses of treatment. As a consequence of UCL research,
      rituximab has brought substantial benefit to patients with many autoimmune
      diseases, including over 200,000 who have been treated with rituximab for
      RA so far.
    
UnderpinningResearch

    In the 1980s and early 1990s it was a general view that rheumatoid
      arthritis (RA) was caused by T cells that attacked specific targets in
      joints. The consequent release of toxic cytokines by joint macrophages was
      generally agreed to be responsible for inflammation. Yet, despite more
      than 20 years of research, no consistently autoreactive T cell had been
      identified. Research at UCL conducted by Jonathan Edwards and Geraldine
      Cambridge led to the hypothesis that B cells played an essential role in
      the pathogenesis of RA [1].
    Following anatomical and immunohistochemical studies of normal and
      diseased human synovium they found that a receptor (CD16) was
      constitutively expressed on macrophages in synovial lining and to a lesser
      extent in other sites affected in the disease. The consequence of CD16
      activation was to stimulate macrophages to generate TNF&#945;, a powerful
      pro-inflammatory cytokine known to be involved in joint inflammation. CD16
      appeared to be activated by soluble complexes of particular
      autoantibodies, previously described in RA patients. They suggested that
      the constant supply of autoantibodies capable of forming these small
      `activating' complexes was due to expansion of B cells (responsible for
      autoantibody generation) in a manner that avoided usual pathways to
      control their number [2]. This led to the hypothesis that removing
      B cells would reduce the inflammatory stimulus and also break the vicious
      cycle of autoreactive B cell expansion.
    Towards the end of the 1990s, Roche developed a drug, rituximab (which
      binds the CD20 marker on all mature B cells), for the treatment of B-cell
      cancers notably lymphomas. Edwards and Cambridge were quick to recognise
      that since both B-cell lymphoma and RA involved uncontrolled proliferation
      of B cell clones, rituximab might well be what they had been waiting for
      to treat patients with RA. Proof of concept followed with the clinical
      success of a small trial of the B-cell-depleting agent, rituximab, in 5
      patients with intractable RA in 1998/9 by the UCL team, and confirmed by
      them in a larger cohort [3, 4].
    The first randomised trial started in 2002 and was published in NEJM in
      2004 [5]. The results indicated that rituximab produced results in
      patients with RA that at least matched those of patients treated with TNF&#945;
      blockade. Successful treatment of patients with systemic lupus
      erythematosus by the group followed [6]. Rituximab was licensed
      for the treatment of patients with RA in 2006.
    