CaseStudyId: 28678
Title: 
    New active target modulation scheme for marine navigation and port
      handling
    

ImpactDetails

    Product improvements: The research outlined above led
      directly to improvements in the
      technology underpinning Guidance Microwave Ltd.'s seven active target
      products. The new
      technology means that operating range performance is increased by 50%,
        from some 600m to
        900m; at the same time, production costs have decreased by
        around 25%. As a result shipping
      companies now benefit from more reliable, short-range navigation
      when berthing large ships, an
      improvement that is of particular importance to oil tankers berthing at
      oil rigs, often in severe
      weather conditions leading to poor visibility. In addition, port
      authorities have greater assurance
        that ships will be able to berth quickly and safely.
    The new approach to active target design conceived by Brennan and based
      on SSB modulated
      backscatter, and demonstration of its effectiveness in both reducing the
      signal processing burden
      and increasing the signal-to-noise ratio and operating range, led directly
      to the adoption of a new
      technique across the entire Guidance Microwave Ltd. product range, as
      indicated in the following
      extract of a letter (in April 2012) from the Managing Director of Guidance
      Microwave Ltd:
    "In 2008 we were developing a 24GHz positioning system for use on
        land, based on our existing
        9GHz positioning system used for local positioning of ships (RadaScan).
        We were developing an
        Active Target to replace the very large and bulky Van Atta targets for
        RadaScan and wished to do
        the same for the Portscan system. We contracted your services to help
        with the development of
        the system concept and this resulted in the outline design for the
        Active Target. This design has
        successfully been patented.
    
    
    "The Active Target has since been developed for the RadaScan system
        and has been a very
        successful product for our company. All of the old Van Atta targets have
        been replaced with the
        new and much smaller Active Targets. To date, we have sold approximately
        280 Active targets
      [700 as of July 2013] with current sales of approximately 25 per
        month. Along with the RadaScan
        sensors, this is very good business for our company and we are grateful
        your support."
    Commercial benefits: The forerunner to this active target
    design used multiple antennas and
    amplifiers in a Van Atta array configuration in order to achieve
    satisfactory operation. The inherent
    9-fold signal strength improvement of the new active target has convinced
    Guidance Microwave
    Ltd. to drop the Van Atta approach and use a simpler single-channel active
    target configuration,
    which actually confers improved performance: testing on mini-Radascan
    performed by Guidance
    Ltd in 2010 indicated a substantial improvement in operating range.
    The impact of this adoption of new technology based on Brennan's research
      is two-fold: firstly, by
      reducing the signal processing burden it allows the cheaper and easier
        production of (smaller)
      active targets based on a single pair of antennas rather than multiple Van
      Atta pairs and, in
      particular, it reduces the signal processing and RF demands on the radar
      system that interrogates
      those targets; secondly, it provides better performance via a
        substantially increased operating
        range. The ability to develop better products at a lower cost has
      conferred a significant competitive
      advantage upon Guidance Microwave Ltd, whose products now outperform those
      of their
      competitors despite the lower cost of their production. Such products have
      been very successful
      for the company, and now 100% of their production has moved to the new
        design proposed
        by Brennan. Guidance Microwave Ltd. began to deploy the new active
      target in 2009, switching
      over its entire product range before the end of 2010. The fact that
      Brennan's design allows for
      cheaper and easier production also means that Guidance Microwave Ltd.
      profits have been
      impacted positively: mini-Radascan is now the most successful Guidance
      product in terms of
      sales, according to the Managing Director of Guidance Microwave Ltd,
      generating sales of more
        than &#163;3 million. In 2010 and 2011 UK and US patent applications
      were filed to protect the
      technique.
    Wider benefits to the shipping industry: The unrivalled
      performance and efficient architecture
      afforded by this technique has helped Guidance Microwave Ltd to become the
      market leaders in
      this area. However, the technology has also benefitted the shipping
      industry (which contributed
      &#163;12.5bn to UK GDP in 2011) much more broadly &#8212; including major oil
      companies &#8212; by providing a
      short-range navigation solution with the best possible performance.
      Guidance Microwave
      Ltd. estimate that around 300 ships and oil rigs currently have the
      technology installed.
    
ImpactSummary

    A new product has been developed to aid marine navigation and berthing at
      ports, based on the
      use of a single-sideband (SSB) active target, offering the dual benefits
      of substantially enhanced
      performance, and reduced size and production costs. The research has
      achieved significant
      commercial impact via the incorporation of the technique, conceived by
      Brennan, into all such
      targets made by Guidance Microwave Ltd, a UK-based engineering company
      specialising in the
      development, manufacture and supply of short-range active target location
      systems. To date, the
      company has sold approximately 700 active targets (around 25 per month),
      generating more than
      &#163;3 million in sales. The idea (subject to patent protection) was initially
      incorporated in the mini-Radascan
      product, which is now a valuable tool to the industry and has given
      Guidance Microwave
      Ltd. a competitive advantage, becoming their most successful product.
    
UnderpinningResearch

    Professor Paul Brennan (UCL 1989-present, Professor of Microwave
      Electronics since 2008) has a
      strong track record in microwave/radio frequency research and innovation,
      and he has undertaken
      extensive work on phase-locked loop frequency synthesis for mobile
      communications RFID tags,
      phased array antennas and oceanographic [1, 2] and geophysical imaging
      radar sponsored by
      and/or in collaboration with the EU, EPRSC, NERC, British Antarctic
      Survey, University of
      Cambridge, Philips, and Nokia. As a result of the reputation for expertise
      he developed through
      previous work in RF systems and radar, Brennan was approached by Guidance
      Microwave Ltd. in
      2008 for advice on the development of their active target location systems
      operating at 9 GHz, and
      on a planned new system at 24 GHz. These systems are used to help ships
      navigate in, and berth
      at, ports, and at other structures such as oil rigs. A critical evaluation
      of Guidance Microwave Ltd.'s
      systems [3] was performed in 2008 by Brennan's team, including Kevin
      Chetty (then a Research
      Associate at UCL; now a Lecturer in its Department of Security &amp; Crime
      Science). This research
      particularly analysed the system's existing demodulation configuration
      with a view to improving
      system functionality, efficiency and reliability, whilst retaining &#8212; and
      indeed enhancing &#8212; its
      commercial viability.
    A number of new ideas emerged from this research [4-6] in particular a
      technique offering a
      substantial improvement to the active target modulation system, which was
      of clear value to
      Guidance Microwave Ltd. In the original Guidance system, the active
      targets used modulated
      backscatter based on on-off keying (OOK) modulation at 125 kb/s of a
      1.75/2.5 MHz frequency-shift
      keyed (FSK) modulated subcarrier to indicate their identities. The
      challenge in demodulating
      these signals in order to recover the data is that the sub-carrier
      frequencies, at intermediate
      frequency (IF), are much greater than the carrier frequencies, leading to
      spectrum foldover and
      difficulty in recovering the data. This is conventionally managed by using
      IQ demodulation,
      requiring two signal channels in the subsequent digital signal processing.
      However, the UCL study
      revealed that if the active transponder were to single-sideband modulate
      the incident radar signal
      to produce a subcarrier at only the sum (or difference) frequency, then
      there would be no issue of
      spectrum foldover and data recovery could be readily performed without the
      need for IQ
      processing, halving the burden on the digital signal processing. An
      outline design of the hardware
      required to achieve this function was presented to the company in 2008,
      using digital quadrature
      generation of the modulated subcarrier (125 kb/s on a 2.5 MHz subcarrier)
      with a minimum of
      additional components. A signal-to-noise ratio (SNR) analysis demonstrated
      that the proposed
      approach also offered a significant improvement in performance that would
      lead to greater
      operating range.
    Guidance Microwave Ltd. explored this idea when Brennan presented it to
      them in 2008 and were
      very pleased with the results. Not only was a signal-to-noise-ratio
      improvement of some 9 dB
      obtained in all of their active target products, due to the avoidance of
      issues associated with
      spectrum foldover, but the new circuitry in the active targets was around
      50% cheaper and less
      complex than the circuitry it replaced. Subsequent testing conducted in
      2010 revealed that the
      operating range of these systems was increased by around 50% as a result
      of the new targets.
      This meant that the performance of a newer Guidance product, mini-Radascan,
      approached that of
      the larger Radascan system, making it particularly attractive to
      customers with smaller vessels
      and/or reduced budgets.
    Since 2008, Brennan has continued to work with Guidance Microwave Ltd. on
      a range of areas of
      interest, including the development of a radically new approach to active
      target location, now the
      subject of a separate patent application. Work to demonstrate the
      feasibility of this new technique
      is nearing completion and a demonstrator was trialled in field tests in
      summer 2013.
    