CaseStudyId: 29098
Title: 
    Stratification of treatment for adult patients with acute leukaemia
    

ImpactDetails

    The overall impact of this work has been to avoid the unnecessary use of
      stem cell transplantation
      in adults with acute leukaemia by identifying those who are most likely to
      benefit from this
      procedure.
    Impact on guidelines and clinical practice
    Following the publication of the results of the AML 10 and 12 trials,
      jointly devised by researchers
      at UCL and Glasgow (subsequently Cardiff), the consolidation of first
      remission AML with an
      autologous stem cell transplant has ceased in the UK and most other parts
      of the world. An
      allogeneic transplant from a matched sibling had been the treatment of
      choice for consolidation in
      first complete remission, but we were able to show that this should not be
      carried out in patients
      with good risk cytogenetics, classified according to a system developed at
      UCL and known as the
      MRC classification. By a series of sequential biomarker studies carried
      out at UCL, we have been
      able to further subdivide patients into specific prognostic categories
      according to the presence and
      level of specific mutations. This allows low risk patients to be spared an
      allogeneic transplant and
      this risk classification has been incorporated into treatment algorithms
      throughout the world. Such
      use of molecular biomarkers is now standard of care in the UK and is used
      to stratify patients in the
      current UK AML17 trial [a].
    The results of our research underpin European guidance on AML produced by
      the European
      Leukaemia Network [b]. These guidelines are signposted by the
      British Committee for Standards
      in Haematology [c]. US National Comprehensive Cancer Network
      guidelines for the treatment of
      AML also cite our work [d].
    In ALL, the demonstration that autologous transplantation has no role in
      the management of this
      disease means that this treatment is no longer used in the UK and further
      afield. The results of
      ALL12 are widely cited in justifying treatment recommendations for adult
      ALL in the US (NCCN)
      and European (ELNET) guidelines [e, f].
    Impact on the health of individuals
    By defining the patients most likely to benefit from HSCT, this research
      has had a significant
      impact on individual health. For AML, these results have influenced
      clinical practice in the
      developed world since approximately 1999 and for ALL since 2004.
      Importantly, patients unlikely to
      benefit from HSCT can be identified &#8212; in adult AML, using the combination
      of cytogenetic and
      molecular markers, about 400 patients per year in the UK can be spared
      consideration of an
      allogeneic HSCT in first remission (based on UK AML incidence data in
      under 65 year olds who
      would be transplant-eligible [g] and breakdown of AML into
      prognostic categories [h].) The
      equivalent figures per annum for the USA and the European Union (excluding
      the UK) are 2,000
      and 3,000 respectively [i]. Avoidance of HSCT reduces the
      significant risks of treatment-induced
      toxicity and mortality and improves the quality of life for patients being
      treated for acute leukaemia.
    Economic benefits
    An allogeneic transplant from a matched sibling currently costs
      approximately &#163;70,000 to the NHS
      and the cost of an autologous transplant is approximately &#163;35,000. In AML,
      the avoidance of 400
      allogeneic HSCT by risk stratification is a potential saving of &#163;28m per
      annum. Although harder to
      quantify, avoiding HSCT may have a significant positive impact on the
      economy more widely, as
      patients avoid treatment-related mortality and chronic disability which
      may be associated with
      HSCT. In ALL, approximately 100 adult patients per year could be treated
      with an autologous
      HSCT and the demonstration that this is not necessary by the ALL12 study
      is a potential saving of
      &#163;3.5 million per year [j].
    
ImpactSummary

    Research conducted at UCL/UCLH over the last 20 years has enabled the
      identification of adults
      with acute leukaemia who are most likely to benefit from the use of stem
      cell transplantation, i.e.
      those with acute leukaemia in first remission. The treatment is highly
      intensive, potentially toxic and
      expensive high-dose chemotherapy followed by haemopoietic stem cell
      transplantation, and is
      inappropriate for some patients. The work has made a major contribution to
      the development of
      guidelines worldwide for the treatment of this disease. Improved patient
      selection for
      transplantation results in improved survival, less toxicity with improved
      overall quality of life, and a
      more appropriate use of NHS resources.
    
UnderpinningResearch

    Around 2,500 adults in the UK are diagnosed with acute myeloid and
      lymphoid leukaemias (AML
      and ALL) each year. Their treatment includes intensive courses of
      cytotoxic chemotherapy and
      consideration of additional high dose cytotoxic therapy and haemopoietic
      stem cell transplantation
      (HSCT). Work from UCL has defined those patients with acute leukaemia most
      appropriately
      treated with high dose cytotoxic therapy and HSCT.
    Acute Myeloid Leukaemia (AML)
    Professors Goldstone (UCL) and Burnett (Glasgow, later Cardiff) were
      asked by the MRC to
      design and set up national randomised trials addressing the value of both
      autologous and
      allogeneic stem cell transplantation in AML. The AML10 trial (1988-1995)
      recruited 1,571 adult
      patients and confirmed that high dose therapy and an autologous HSCT
      resulted in a reduced
      relapse rate, but no overall reduction in death rate, due to unexpectedly
      high procedure-related
      mortality [1]. Allogeneic transplantation was shown to be
      beneficial only in a subset of patients.
      Further analysis of this latter question in the subsequent MRC AML12 trial
      (1995-2002) indicated
      that the greatest benefit was in patients with certain markers of
      chromosomal damage
      (cytogenetics) and that allogeneic HSCT could be avoided in subgroups of
      patients who had very
      good results with chemotherapy alone. This trial was led by Burnett in
      Cardiff, and Goldstone
      contributed to the conception and design of the trial. The cytogenetic
      risk classification used in both
      trials was developed at UCL [2]. This has since been adopted
      worldwide and is used to select
      those patients who get the most benefit from transplantation.
    In parallel with the national trials a DNA/RNA/cell bank was established
      by Professor Linch at UCL
      and point mutations, insertions and deletions were analysed in selected
      genes. These landmark
      biomarker studies from UCL involve the largest cohorts of linked mutation
      and outcome data in
      AML worldwide. In 2001, we published the definitive evidence that mutation
      of the FLT3 gene
      (FLT-3-ITD), present in approximately a quarter of patients, was a poor
      prognostic factor [3]. In
      2008, in an analysis of 1,425 patients, we demonstrated that the combined
      determination of FLT3-ITD
      and NPM1 mutation status could be used to further stratify patients into
      three, therapeutically
      relevant, prognostic groups [4], thereby further refining the
      selection of patients for transplantation.
      Subsequently (2008-13), we have analysed other recurrent gene mutations in
      AML, refining
      prognostic stratification and establishing principles of the
      interpretation of mutation analysis
      relevant to other forms of cancer. For example, our studies of the CEBPA
      gene have indicated that
      biallelic (but not monoallelic) mutations have a sufficiently good
      prognosis to be spared an
      allogeneic transplant [5].
    Acute Lymphoid Leukaemia (ALL)
    In the second major type of acute leukaemia in adults, acute
      lymphoblastic leukaemia (ALL),
      Professor Goldstone, with colleagues from the US, set up the MRC ALL12
      trial (1993-2004) which
      explored issues of dose intensification. This trial recruited 1,914
      patients, the largest ever in adult
      ALL, and showed that standard maintenance chemotherapy was preferable to
      consolidation with
      high dose therapy and an autologous HSCT, and that an allogeneic HSCT from
      a matched sibling
      was the treatment of choice in standard risk patients [6].
    