CaseStudyId: 29109
Title: 
    Moderate hypothermia as a therapy for neonatal encephalopathy improves
      survival and reduces disability
    

ImpactDetails

    Our early work on large animal models underpinned trials undertaken by
      ourselves and by others, which in turn have resulted in therapeutic
      hypothermia becoming standard care for infants with moderate to severe
      neonatal encephalopathy. The importance of the early work at UCL in
      particular, as the basis for later work and impacts was described in
      detail in a recent article [a]. As a result of these important
      international collaborations, over 3,000 infants so far in the UK have
      benefitted from this treatment, which was incorporated into NICE guidance
      in 2010. Our work also resulted in the commercial development of the
      CoolCap.
    Immediately following the conclusion of the enrolment of the TOBY Trial,
      the UK TOBY Cooling Register was set up and was operational between Dec
      2006 and Dec 2012. All newborns treated with cooling in the UK have been
      eligible to be registered. During this time over 3,000 babies cooled at 74
      neonatal units were registered, showing how the treatment has been adopted
      into normal clinical practice [b]. Analysis of these data in 2012
      suggested that the number of babies registered was close to the estimates
      of all babies suffering from moderate to severe neonatal encephalopathy [c].
    The impact on long-term outcomes for these babies is clear. A recent
      meta-analysis including seven trials and 1,214 infants shows that
      therapeutic hypothermia results in a reduction in death or major
      neurodevelopmental disability (risk ratio 0.76; 95% CI 0.69-84) and an
      increase in the rate of survival with normal neurological function (1.63;
      1.36-1.95) at age 18 months [d]. Based on the number of infants
      treated by cooling we can predict that approximately 450 have avoided
      death or serious neurological disability between 2006 and 2012.
    Following our trial of the CoolCap, this device received FDA approval in
      2006 [e] and has been sold commercially since that time [f].
      It is now in use in 30 hospitals across the United States (many of them
      covering a wide geographical area, due to the specialist nature of the
      services provided) [g].
    In 2009, children's charity Bliss endorsed the positive reports from
      research into cooling: Carmel Bartley, of the children's charity, Bliss
      said: "This is welcome research into an area which is known to save
        lives. It is a specialist treatment we would like to see used more
        widely" [h]
    In 2010, the recommendation for therapeutic hypothermia was incorporated
      into NICE guidelines [i]. The British Association of Perinatal
      Medicine (BAPM) also recommended this treatment in guidelines issued in
      the same year [j]. Enrolment into the cooling Registry increased
      dramatically after this, and shows that there has been a timely,
      systematic implementation of therapeutic hypothermia in the UK to a
      standard protocol. There has been a steady rise in the uptake of
      therapeutic hypothermia across the UK. Elsewhere in the world, in October
      2010, the International Liaison Committee on Resuscitation (ILCOR) and
      American Heart Association released its revised statement recommending
      therapeutic hypothermia as a standard of care for moderate to severe HIE [k].
    A health economic study done by Imperial College London set out the clear
      economic case for this treatment. Using current lifetime costs for each
      child with cerebral palsy (about &#163;750,000) and the economic benefit of
      additional healthy lives (&#163;800,000), the total benefit to the UK economy
      as a result of the implementation of therapeutic hypothermia is likely to
      be over &#163;125 million so far [c].
    
ImpactSummary

    Our early work on large animal models underpinned trials undertaken by
      ourselves and by others, which in turn have resulted in therapeutic
      hypothermia becoming standard care for infants with moderate to severe
      neonatal encephalopathy. In 2010 this was recommended in NICE guidance.
      Over 3,000 babies have now been given this treatment, and we estimate that
      450 have avoided death or serious neurological disability. The estimated
      economic value of this is over &#163;125 million.
    
UnderpinningResearch

    Problems around the time of birth causing a lack of oxygen to the fetus
      (birth asphyxia) can lead to disordered brain function called neonatal
      encephalopathy which can result in death, long-term brain damage, cerebral
      palsy, epilepsy and other significant cognitive, developmental and
      behavioural problems. Neonatal encephalopathy occurs in 750-1,125 infants
      in the UK every year. The financial and human costs to infants affected,
      their parents, professionals and wider society are enormous.
    Extensive experimental and clinical research has been carried out at UCL
      since the early 1980s into the evolution and timing of energy failure and
      cell death following perinatal hypoxia-ischaemia. Osmond Reynolds and his
      team of researchers at UCL were struck by the group's magnetic resonance
      spectroscopy data showing that the infant's brain is normal in the hours
      after asphyxia and cell death occurs only after a distinct delay of
      several hours. Delayed brain injury (called "secondary energy failure" by
      Reynolds) was a critical new idea: this secondary deterioration in brain
      energy metabolism was observed in both babies with neonatal encephalopathy
      and then in animal models [1]. This delay in cell death opened the
      possibility of therapeutic intervention in what had previously been
      considered an impossible situation. A key breakthrough came in 1995 when
      the UCL team demonstrated that if whole-body cooling was introduced in the
      period just after hypoxia-ischaemia in the piglet brain, secondary energy
      failure was ameliorated or prevented and brain cell death reduced [2].
    Confirmatory studies in Sweden and New Zealand built on these
      demonstrations, and as a result, the first clinical trial of therapeutic
      hypothermia was initiated. This was the multicentre CoolCap Trial, which
      involved selective head cooling. John Wyatt (UCL) and Peter Gluckman
      (Auckland) were the principal investigators of this trial. The first
      patient was enrolled in 1999 and the study was published in the Lancet in
      2005 [3]. The trial used selective head cooling and mild body
      cooling (to 34.5oC) to minimise potential side effects of
      cooling. The results were encouraging; although Coolcap showed a
      non-significant trend to improvement with cooling in the primary outcome
      of death or disability at 18 months overall, there was a clear and
      significant benefit when infants with very severe or long-established
      injury were excluded.
    Other major studies of cooling followed, building on our early work. As
      we had demonstrated that there had been no major adverse effects of
      controlled cooling to 34.5oC and whole body cooling seemed more
      practical, most of the subsequent cooling studies used whole body cooling
      to a core temperature of 33.5oC. The next major cooling study
      to be published was that run by the National Institute for Child Health
      and Human Development (NICHD), which showed a significant effect of
      cooling. In the UK, total body hypothermia for neonatal encephalopathy
      (TOBY) trial was set up. This trial was still recruiting when the results
      from the CoolCap trial were published showing a marginal benefit from
      cooling. As a result of this, the TOBY trial size was increased. The
      results of the TOBY trial were remarkably consistent with previous trials.
    The most recent systematic review (Jacobs et al. 2013) showed that
      cooling increases the infants' chance of surviving without neurological
      deficits at 18 months, reducing neurodevelopmental impairment in
      survivors. The relative effects of selective head and whole body cooling
      seemed indistinguishable. In summary the UCL research identified secondary
      energy failure after neonatal asphyxia, demonstrated the beneficial
      effects in animal models and illustrated salutary effects in the first
      clinical trial of brain cooling, later confirmed by many other
      investigators.
    