CaseStudyId: 29547
Title: 
    A safer and shorter treatment for thyroid cancer
    

ImpactDetails

    There are &gt;2,100 new cases of thyroid cancer each year in the UK,
      &gt;48,000 in the US, and &gt;213,000 worldwide. It is the most frequently
      occurring endocrine tumour, and one of the few cancers where the incidence
      is increasing [a]. Thyroid cancer, unlike most other cancers, is
      common among younger people (&lt;50 years) who are still in work, and
      particularly women (many with children). Most cases are
      well-differentiated thyroid cancer (85-90% of new cases), in which the
      cure rate is already high; therefore new treatments that are safer,
      cheaper or easier to administer are the research goals.
    The results of the HiLo trial provided clear evidence for a shorter and
      safer treatment for thyroid cancer. Cancer Research UK commented that the
      results of this trial "have set a new gold standard for treating
        thyroid cancer, reducing radiation doses to just one third of the
        current level... patients taking the lower dose capsule can be treated
        more easily as an outpatient in hours and experience fewer side effects"
      [b].
    The HiLo trial collected data on clinical efficacy, patient safety/harms,
      NHS resource use, and societal costs, allowing a comprehensive assessment
      of the impact in the clinical setting, as well as on healthcare costs and
      people's lives. Overall, the research described above showed the following
      benefits to patients and to the economy:
    Benefits to patients:
    
      New treatment can be delivered as outpatient treatment which is
        quicker and easier for patient
      Fewer side effects (e.g. nausea and neck pain)
      Reduced chance of developing a new tumour in the next 10-30 years,
        which can often be more difficult to treat than the original thyroid
        cancer
      Improved quality of life, as THST does not need to be suspended (of
        particular relevance to those of working age, or caring for children &#8212;
        which is a relatively high proportion for this type of cancer)
    
    Economic benefits:
    
      Reduction in side effects is associated with lower costs to treat
        these side effects.
      Shorter hospital stay also reduces costs
      Overall 14% reduction in NHS costs using low dose radioiodine plus
        thyrotropin alfa compared to the previous standard of high dose plus
        thyroid hormone withdrawal.
      Many thyroid cancer patients are in employed work, and the average
        number of days taken off work during the 2-4 weeks before radioiodine
        treatment is 1 day (low dose) compared to 5 days (high dose).
    
    We have disseminated the results of the HiLo trial through presentations
      at several international conferences in countries planning to change
      routine practice (including Europe, Israel and Korea) [c]. Our
      results were also widely reported in the medical press and in
      patient-facing resources on thyroid cancer treatment [d].
    In 2012, the trial findings were used to change the European licence
      indication for Thyrogen (thyrotropin alfa), so that it can now be used
      with low dose radioiodine (the previous licence was only for use with the
      high dose) [e].
    New guidelines are currently in preparation in both the UK [f]
      and US [g] to recommend low dose radioactive iodine and
      thyrotropin alfa for routine practice. In the meantime, this treatment.is
      already being adopted; the NCRI Clinical Studies Groups 2013 annual
      report, impact section, states: "The HiLO study published in the New
        England Journal of Medicine is now significantly changing the clinical
        practice of oncologists and endocrinologists giving post-operative
        radio-iodine ablation to thyroid cancer patients. The dose has now been
        decreased considerably as a result of this study and adoption has
        proceeded rapidly in the UK" [h].
    An informal survey of clinicians has shown that 16 centres in the UK have
      implemented the HiLo trial protocols since the publication. Responses
      included:
    "I am routinely using HILO doses as per study in my practice ever
        since results were confirmed."
    "Our policy...is to stratify patients needed I131 post thyroidectomy
        who would have fit the criteria for the Hi-Lo into 2 groups low risk or
        higher risk. Those patients in who remnant ablation is the aim of
        management (i.e. well differentiated node negative disease T1-3) are
        considered low risk and are treated with Thyrogen priming pre ablation
        and 1.1 GBq I131 as HiLo study" [i].
    "We have been using lower activity RAI for about 18 months" [j].
    "I can confirm that I have implemented one element of the HiLo study
        before 31/7/2013...Specifically this is the lower dose of I131" [k].
    Following on from the HiLo trial, a new trial &#8212; ION &#8212; is underway to
      determine whether thyroid cancer patients, in whom the risk of the cancer
      coming back is low, need radioactive iodine (RAI) ablation at all, given
      that they have already had a total thyroidectomy and are being given
      thyroid stimulating hormone suppression (TSHS) therapy [l]. The
      control arm for this trial uses low dose radioactive iodine, demonstrating
      that this is now entering accepted standard practice in the 35 centres
      participating in the trial.
    
ImpactSummary

    The HiLo trial has changed management for patients with
      well-differentiated thyroid cancer. Patients undergoing radioiodine
      ablation therapy are now given a low dose of radioactive iodine, which has
      fewer side effects, compared to the previous (standard) high dose. Also,
      to prepare patients for ablation they now have recombinant human TSH
      (thyrotropin alfa), which is associated with a better quality of life
      before and during ablation. The combination of low dose radioiodine and
      thyrotropin alfa means that patients can be treated as outpatients rather
      than inpatients. This is a more convenient treatment package, reducing
      health service and societal costs.
    
UnderpinningResearch

    Prior to the research described below, the standard treatment for most
      patients with well-differentiated thyroid cancer was as follows: they
      would first have a total thyroidectomy, then would go on lifelong thyroid
      hormone suppression therapy (THST); several weeks later they would receive
      high dose (3.7 GBq) radioactive iodine to destroy remaining cancer cells
      or residual normal thyroid tissue, at which point they would spend two to
      five days in hospital isolation, because of radiation protection issues;
      before radioiodine ablation, patients would have to temporarily stop THST,
      which would result in hypothyroidism, reducing quality of life.
    There were two unanswered questions about this treatment, which our
      research aimed to address. Firstly, high dose radioiodine has side effects
      and increases the chance of a new cancer in the future, and there has long
      been discussion over whether low dose radioiodine is just as effective.
      Secondly, a longstanding research question was whether taking recombinant
      human thyroid stimulating hormone (thyrotropin alfa) before ablation
      (which avoids the need to stop THST) would affect treatment success rates.
    In 2007, Professor Allan Hackshaw (Cancer Research UK and UCL Cancer
      Trials Centre) initiated and led a comprehensive systematic review of all
      59 published studies into thyroid cancer, in order to address these two
      questions. This evaluation showed that it was not possible to reliably
      determine whether clinicians could use a lower radioiodine dose or not,
      and there was insufficient evidence to recommend thyrotropin alfa before
      ablation [1].
    As a result of these findings, Cancer Research UK (CRUK) funded a large
      randomised trial, led by Hackshaw and the trial Chief Investigator, Dr
      Ujjal Mallick (Freeman Hospital, Newcastle). The trial concept originated
      from Mallick and Hackshaw through the NCRN Head and Neck Cancer Clinical
      Studies Group. UCL was responsible for trial design, study conduct and
      statistical analyses, and was the trial Sponsor.
    HiLo was the first ever UK national trial in thyroid cancer (438 patients
      recruited 2007-10), and the first factorial study in this cancer. It was
      independently peer-reviewed by CRUK, conducted across the UK National
      Cancer Research Networks and published in the New England Journal of
      Medicine [2]. These attributes confirm the high quality of this
      seminal and unique trial.
    Treatment success rates were 85.0% in the group receiving low-dose
      radioiodine versus 88.9% in the group receiving the high dose; and 87.1%
      in the thyrotropin alfa group versus 86.7% in the group undergoing thyroid
      hormone withdrawal &#8212; all indicating non-inferiority. Similar results were
      found for low-dose radioiodine plus thyrotropin alfa (84.3%) versus
      high-dose radioiodine plus thyroid hormone withdrawal (87.6%) or high-dose
      radioiodine plus thyrotropin alfa (90.2%).
    