CaseStudyId: 29571
Title: 
    Groundwater arsenic pollution: Informing policies and mitigation
      programmes,
      leading to improved public health security in Bangladesh
    

ImpactDetails

    Between 2008 and 2013, UCL's research into arsenic pollution of
      groundwater has had significant
      impacts on policy, practice and public health security in Bangladesh.
      Specifically, it has guided the
      development and refinement of policy on groundwater pumping in response to
      the groundwater
      arsenic crisis and underpinned practical approaches towards arsenic
      mitigation and groundwater
      monitoring; as a result, it has improved public health security across the
      region. Globally, the
      research has contributed to the development by UNICEF of policies relating
      to the investigation
      and mitigation of arsenic contamination. Key research findings were shared
      widely with
      stakeholders beyond academia, partly as a natural outcome of the
      collaborative nature of the
      research, to which Bangladesh government departments and NGOs contributed
      through their
      provision of access and data. The reach of the impact was further extended
      by UCL contributions
      to national meetings and workshops in Bangladesh, including a workshop
      titled Deep groundwater
        in Bangladesh: UCL research in support of policy development in
      January 2013 in Dhaka.
    Supporting UNICEF policy and directives: UNICEF has been a leading
      international provider
      and facilitator of mitigating actions responding to the arsenic crisis in
      Southeast Asia. The
      organisation has adopted UCL's explanation of the underlying processes and
      causes of
      groundwater arsenic in the Bengal Basin as the standard paradigm for
      understanding arsenic
      pollution in alluvial aquifers worldwide [A]. UCL research provided
      fundamental support for
      UNICEF's assessment of global health impacts of groundwater arsenic, which
      underpinned its
      development of policies and directives for its country offices, published
      in 2008 [B]. By
      demonstrating that the existing state of contamination in Bangladesh was
      both predictable and
      manageable, UCL research particularly facilitated UNICEF's proposals for
      rational and effective
      responses [A]. Significant projects supported by UNICEF since 2008, and
      reflecting or responding
      to those proposals, include the Bangladesh Government's Department of
      Public Health
      Engineering (DPHE) 15-year water supply and sanitation `Sector Development
      Plan' [C], published
      in 2011 by the DPHE Policy Support Unit (PSU). The Sector Development Plan
      describes national
      strategy for the investment of approximately $20 billion in the water,
      sanitation and health (WASH)
      sector. UNICEF Bangladesh's Water and Environmental Sanitation Specialist
      stated: "Completely
      outside academic circles, the UCL work, both directly, and indirectly by
      shaping DPHE reports,
      quite simply transformed the policy debate in Bangladesh and India, and
      indeed beyond because it
      guided my 2007/08 global predictive modelling for UNICEF" [A].
    Guiding Bangladesh government policy development: The DPHE Policy
      Support Unit leads the
      development of government policy in the water supply and sanitation sector
      in Bangladesh. The
      January 2013 Dhaka workshop on Deep groundwater in Bangladesh,
      co-convened by UCL, Dhaka
      University and the PSU, was attended by representatives of the DPHE, the
      Bangladesh Water
      Development Board (BWDB), the Bangladesh Agricultural Development
      Corporation, the
      Geological Survey of Bangladesh, the Water Resources Policy Organisation,
      and the donor
      (including UNICEF and WaterAid) and NGO communities [D]. It resulted in
      the submission of an
      advisory policy statement ('Deep Groundwater in Southern Bangladesh - a
      vital source of water')
      [E] to the PSU [D]. This statement promotes deep groundwater as a
      long-term secure water source
      to mitigate the effects of arsenic and salinity in southern Bangladesh,
      and identifies seven points of
      consensus around which policy should be framed. According to the PSU
      Director, the UCL
      research has "made a highly regarded impact in helping the Government of
      Bangladesh develop
      its policy towards deep groundwater pumping and water quality protection"
      [D].
    Support for arsenic mitigation programmes: The DPHE is the
      Bangladesh government
      authority with principal responsibility for arsenic mitigation through
      provision of safe water supplies,
      and BRAC (formerly the Bangladesh Rural Advisory Committee) is the leading
      NGO in the WASH
      sector. UCL research has been used by the Arsenic Management Division of
      the DPHE to develop
      deep groundwater pumping as a mitigation strategy [F], and informed deep
      tubewell mitigation
      provisions developed by BRAC [G]. Decisions on the optimum depth of
      arsenic mitigation wells in
      the DPHE 2011 Sector Development Plan [C] and the BRAC 2011 WASH Programme
      II [H], have
      been supported by the research on the spatial and depth-distribution of
      the arsenic source, and the
      hydraulic structure of the Bengal aquifer system [F, G].
    Contributions to public health security: Deep groundwater in
      Bangladesh is free of excessive
      arsenic. The implementation of deep groundwater pumping strategies by DPHE
      and BRAC
      between 2000 and 2013, to designs informed by UCL research [F, G], is
      estimated to have
      reduced arsenic exposure &#8212; thereby enhancing health, welfare and quality
      of life &#8212; among a
      combined total of some 10 million people across southern Bangladesh [F,
      G]. The BRAC WASH
      Programme alone involved the drilling of 3,966 deep tubewells between 2006
      and 2011, targeting
      8.5 million people, mostly living in rural areas [H]. Public health
      security has also been protected by
      the UCL research finding that arsenic pollution in Bangladesh is natural,
      and not caused by
      pumping for irrigation (reference [1] above). This finding has helped
      underpin the maintenance of
      food-grain self sufficiency in the country from 1998 to the present day.
      In 1998, there were
      demands both within civil society and at ministerial level for a ban on
      groundwater irrigation, then
      thought to be the cause of arsenic pollution. The UCL discovery catalysed
      and informed public
      debate about the issue, supporting counter-demands that ensured the
      continuation of groundwater
      irrigation. The enduring impact of this reversal is affirmed by UNICEF
      Bangladesh's Water and
      Environmental Sanitation Specialist, who notes that "UCL research was
      central to this process",
      which has itself been "critical to maintaining food-grain self-sufficiency
      in Bangladesh and a
      substantial part of India" [A].
    Influence on groundwater monitoring practice: The BWDB is the
      Bangladesh government
      authority with responsibility for monitoring the quality and quantity of
      the groundwater resources
      nationally. McArthur's research findings on the rate of groundwater flux
      at the arsenic source
      regions (reference [4], above), and Burgess's research on the rate of
      migration of arsenic towards
      pumping wells (references [5] and [6] above), alerted BWDB [I] and UNICEF
      [A] to the
      requirements and timescales for groundwater monitoring. The research
      findings influenced the
      BWDB's approach to groundwater monitoring, specifically regarding the
      security of deep
      groundwater, and informed their establishment in 2012 of a coastal
      groundwater network of over
      120 monitoring points [I]. BWDB continues to appraise the design of its
      national deep groundwater
      monitoring programme in the light of UCL research, most recently through
      consultation at the
      January 2013 Dhaka workshop. That workshop, according to the BWDB Deputy
      Director (Ground
      Water Hydrology), "gave the opportunity for us to consider the
      contributions of UCL research and
      their implications for our approach towards groundwater monitoring. Our
      joint effort has been
      guiding BWDB to plan and develop appropriate investigation and monitoring
      technologies in order
      to generate good quality hydrogeological data and information for the
      sustainable use of limited
      fresh and safe groundwater resource" [I].
    
ImpactSummary

    UCL research findings about the source, transport and fate of arsenic in
      sediments exploited for
      water supply in the Bengal Basin have underpinned the development and
      implementation of policy
      by the Bangladesh government, international donors and non-governmental
      organisations (NGOs),
      and led to improvements in public health security across southern
      Bangladesh. By demonstrating
      that arsenic pollution in Bangladesh is not caused by irrigation pumping,
      the research countered
      popular demands and government intentions to curb irrigation, thereby
      supporting the country's
      continued food-grain self-sufficiency. Subsequent UCL explanations of the
      geochemical and
      hydraulic processes controlling groundwater arsenic have underpinned
      further revision of the
      government's strategies for monitoring groundwater and mitigating the
      crisis; the resultant
      reduction in arsenic exposure among approximately 10 million people has
      significantly enhanced
      public health security.
    
UnderpinningResearch

    Arsenic exposure &#8212; the adverse effects of which include cancers, diseases
      of the vascular system,
      and death &#8212; presents a serious global threat to public health. Since 1990,
      extensive arsenic
      pollution of groundwater has been recognised in Quaternary fluvio-deltaic
      sediments exploited for
      water supply. The problem is especially acute across the densely populated
      floodplains of
      Southeast Asia, where shallow groundwater constitutes the only
      bacteriologically safe source of
      water for more than 100 million inhabitants. In Bangladesh and West Bengal
      alone &#8212; where
      shallow groundwater contains arsenic at concentrations up to 100 times the
      World Health
      Organization (WHO) guideline limit for drinking water &#8212; some 70 million
      people are affected, and
      sustainable mitigation solutions are far from universally implemented.
    Research conducted since 1997 by John McArthur and William Burgess in the
      Department of Earth
      Sciences at UCL has addressed the distribution, source, transport and fate
      of arsenic in the Bengal
      Basin, taken as a type area for Quaternary fluvio-deltaic aquifers.
      McArthur and Burgess' first
      published contribution in 1998 (with graduate student Nickson and
      collaborators in Bangladesh) set
      out their deduction, from the geochemical context and analysis of water
      from 46 wells in
      Bangadesh, that groundwater arsenic derives from reduction of
      arsenic-bearing iron oxyhydroxides
      in the sediments [1]. This finding overturned the previous consensus that
      arsenic enters
      groundwater by oxidation of arsenic-bearing pyrite in response to
      water-table lowering by irrigation
      pumping. The research demonstrated that arsenic pollution in Bangladesh is
      a natural
      phenomenon, rather than being caused by irrigation pumping.
    Extensive fieldwork and laboratory analysis of groundwater and sediment
      cores from West Bengal,
      conceived by McArthur and executed in conjunction with lead collaborator
      D. M. Banerjee
      (University of Delhi) and other collaborators in the UK and India (as
      indicated by the author lists on
      references [2-4]), were conducted between 2000 and 2008. This work exposed
      buried peat as the
      main cause of the chemical reaction giving rise to severe arsenic
      pollution in the groundwater [2].
      Building on this, the research team developed and used their 'palaeosol'
      model [3] to demonstrate
      that the current distribution of arsenic in groundwater reflects the
      distribution of palaeo-channels
      and palaeo-interfluves that developed between 125,000 and 18,000 years
      ago, as sea-level fell
      and a late-Pleistocene landscape developed across the Bengal Basin. This
      model applies to delta
      regions worldwide, and is valuable as a guide both for groundwater
      monitoring and for siting
      arsenic-safe tubewells [4].
    Also between 2000 and 2008, Burgess worked in an equal collaboration with
      P. Ravenscroft
      (consultant in Dhaka) and K. M. Ahmed (Dhaka University) on an
      interpretation of more than 3,000
      groundwater analyses, supplemented by sediment core analysis and
      permeability measurements.
      Using data from these studies, they established a hydrogeological
      synthesis of arsenic occurrence
      across southern Bangladesh [5]. Burgess, with graduate students at UCL,
      then developed
      conceptual and numerical models to show how groundwater flow controls
      present-day arsenic
      concentration at shallow pumping wells, and to posit future trends. At
      basin-scale, Burgess worked
      with UCL research student Hoque and their collaborators in Bangladesh to
      determine the potential
      for deep groundwater, which is free of excessive arsenic, to provide a
      safe alternative water
      supply. Via their analysis of more than 2,000 borehole records and
      development of numerical
      models, Burgess and his collaborators described the major elements of the
      Bengal Aquifer System
      to &gt;350m depth, its development over Plio-Quaternary time, and the
      extent of its vulnerability to
      contamination by arsenic as a consequence of excessive pumping [6]. This
      evaluation
      underpinned recognition of the potential for deep groundwater as a secure
      mitigation option;
      Burgess and UCL research fellow M. Shamsudduha presented that option to
      Bangladesh
      government authorities at a workshop in Dhaka in January 2013 (see section
      4). The analysis of
      the vulnerability of deep groundwater was an equal collaboration between
      Burgess, M. Hoque
      (UCL graduate student), H. Michael (Univ. Delaware, USA), C. Voss and G.
      Breit (US Geological
      Survey) and K. M. Ahmed (Dhaka University).
    UCL researchers: John M. McArthur (Reader 1997-2000; Professor
      2000-present), William G.
      Burgess (Senior Lecturer in Hydrogeology 1993-present), and Mohammad
      Shamsudduha
      (Postgraduate Research Fellow 2012-present).
    