CaseStudyId: 29573
Title: 
    Lung cancer research at UCL/UCLH sets standards of care
    

ImpactDetails

    The combination of mitomycin, ifosfamide, and cisplatin (MIC) was
      previously widely used in Europe for the treatment of advanced NSCLC. This
      required patients to stay in hospital overnight, and had adverse effects
      on quality of life. Cisplatin and etoposide (PE) were commonly used
      together to treat poor prognosis SCLC. However, major problems with
      cisplatin treatment were the administration time and significant
      symptomatic non-haematological toxicity.
    Gemcitabine/carboplatin (gem/carbo) became popular because it was given
      as an out-patient treatment with short infusion time. It was also better
      tolerated, causing less emesis, renal impairment, hearing loss and
      neurotoxicity compared to other regimens. In addition, many NSCLC patients
      are elderly (median age 72) with poor performance status and have multiple
      co- morbidities, so clinicians often recommend carboplatin instead of
      cisplatin to treat this population group. Gem/carbo therefore became
      widely used as a first-line treatment in the UK and internationally to
      treat patients with advanced NSCLC (Lilly data). In 2009, NICE guidance
      recommended pemetrexed-based chemotherapy for NSCLC [a], and since
      that time, gem/carbo has been used mainly to treat SCLC (NICE guidelines
      TA26 [b] and CG121 [c]).
    The following recommendations are from the NICE website (accessed 30
      April 2013), based on the findings of the UCL trials:
    SCLC [d]:
    "Early stage (broadly T1-2a, N0, M0) or limited disease (broadly T1-4,
        N0-3, M0)
    Consider carboplatin if renal function impaired, poor performance
        status (WHO 2 or more) or significant comorbidity"
    Extensive disease (broadly T1-4, N0-3, M1a/b)
    Offer platinum-based combination chemotherapy (maximum 6 cycles) if
        patient can receive chemotherapy".
    NSCLC [e]:
    "For advanced NSCLC, offer a combination of a single third-generation
        drug (docetaxel, gemcitabine, paclitaxel or vinorelbine) plus a platinum
        drug (either carboplatin or cisplatin)."
    As a result of the national guidance, gem/carbo was used as a reference
      regimen in the BTOG 2 trial (a large national clinical trial of 1,350
      NSCLC patients) to compare low dose and high dose platinum regimens [f].
      The study shows gem/carbo was well tolerated and superior to low dose
      cisplatin but has similar outcome compared to high dose cisplatin regimen
      [g].
    The Study 10 findings are also quoted in the US National Comprehensive
      Cancer Network (NCCN) guidelines to support the use of carboplatin to
      treat extensive SCLC [h]. Individual patient data from Study 10
      were used for the meta-analysis comparing the efficacy of cisplatin versus
      carboplatin in the first-line treatment of SCLC [i]. There is also
      reference to Study 10 in Canadian guidelines on bladder cancer [j].
    Approximately 4,000 new cases of SCLC are diagnosed in the UK each year.
      The majority of these patients have extensive SCLC and poor performance
      status and hence many are treated with a carboplatin-based regimen instead
      of a cisplatin-based treatment. A carboplatin regimen can be easily
      administered as an out-patient regimen reducing chair time usage and
      avoiding the inconvenience of prolonged hydration or overnight stay
      associated with cisplatin and also fewer of the adverse effects that are
      commonly seen with cisplatin administration.
    The Systemic Anti-Cancer Therapy (SACT) Dataset, within the National
      Cancer Intelligence Network, has been recording data on types of
      treatments for lung cancer since April 2012. For 2012 there were 3,686
      SCLC cases recorded in England and Wales. The SACT dataset shows that
      between April 2012 and March 2013, 710 patients with SCLC received
      carboplatin, though only around 80% of trusts had uploaded data so the
      actual number is likely to be nearer 900, meaning that 26% of SCLC
      patients received carboplatin [k].
    
ImpactSummary

    UCL has conducted a series of national lung cancer trials, which have led
      to wide-scale changes in clinical practice. Two trials compared different
      platinum based therapies, which led to centres switching from using
      chemotherapy with cisplatin to carboplatin-based chemotherapy instead.
      Carboplatin can be given as an outpatient, and has fewer side effects, and
      has been (and still is) recommended as an alternative to cisplatin in the
      UK and US.
    
UnderpinningResearch

    Lung cancer is the most common cause of cancer death in the UK and other
      developed countries. The CR-UK &amp; UCL Cancer Trials Centre (CTC), with
      the London Lung Cancer Group (LLCG), has an established history (almost 30
      years) of conducting large scale national trials in lung cancer treatment
      and screening. The chair of the LLCG is Professor Siow Ming Lee, based at
      UCL/UCLH.
    Gemcitabine/carboplatin as first-line treatment for lung cancer (known
        as studies 10 and 11)
    These were two national clinical multicentre trials in lung cancer,
      initiated, developed and conducted through UCL, to examine the efficacy
      and safety of gemcitabine/carboplatin (gem/carbo) in two different types
      of lung cancer. The Chief Investigator was Professor Siow Ming Lee. Both
      trials were independently peer-reviewed by Cancer Research UK and were
      conducted through the UK National Cancer Research Networks. All of the
      trials were large collaborative multicentre studies involving as many as
      95 hospitals across the UK.
    Study 10 (extensive or limited stage small cell lung cancer
      (SCLC) with poor prognosis): compared gem/carbo with standard
      cisplatin/etoposide (PE) in 241 patients. This was the first randomised
      study comparing these two chemotherapy regimens for patients with
      poor-prognosis small cell lung cancer (SCLC). It showed that gem/carbo had
      similar survival outcomes to PE, but was better tolerated. Patients given
      gem/carbo received more chemotherapy as outpatients (89% vs. 66%), and
      fewer had nausea and alopecia (the two most commonly reported side effects
      associated with lower quality of life) [1].
    Study 11 (stage IIIb or IV non-small cell lung cancer
      (NSCLC)): gem/carbo was compared with standard mitomycin, ifosfamide, and
      cisplatin (MIC), This trial, based on 422 patients, showed for the first
      time that outpatient chemotherapy was more effective than conventional
      inpatient chemotherapy, improving median survival from 7.6 to 10.0 months
      (24% reduction in mortality) and one-year survival from 30% to 40%.
      Furthermore, quality of life was significantly improved, because patients
      given gem/carbo had fewer side effects [2]. An added advantage was
      that gem/carbo avoided the inconvenience and NHS cost of an overnight stay
      in hospital.
    