CaseStudyId: 29572
Title: 
    Standard of care established for advanced biliary tract cancer
    

ImpactDetails

    About 1,200 people are diagnosed with biliary tract cancer each year in
      the UK and 12,000 in the US. For the majority of patients, it is an
      incurable cancer and before 2010 there was no established standard of
      care; some patients had best supportive care, others single agent drugs.
      Therefore, there was an urgent need to find effective treatments.
    Our research showed that the doublet regimen of gemcitabine and cisplatin
      increases the median survival from 8.2 months (gemcitabine alone) to 11.7
      months, i.e. an extra 3.5 months of life on average. This is equivalent to
      reducing the chance of dying by 36%. Importantly, the side effects/harm
      associated with the doublet therapy were similar to the single agent. This
      improvement in patient outcomes led to revised international guidelines on
      treating biliary tract cancer, recommending this doublet therapy as
      routine care since 2011:
    
      The European Society for Medical Oncology (ESMO), following the first
        presentation of the ABC02 results in 2011, stated that the trial "set a
        new standard of care", and assigned it Level II evidence (`Evidence is
        obtained from at least one well-designed experimental study') [a].
      In 2012, the British Society of Gastroenterology recommended the
        doublet therapy for advanced or metastatic unresectable
        cholangiocarcinoma (with Grade A evidence) [b].
      The United States NCCN Clinical Practice Guidelines recommended the
        use of gemcitabine/cisplatin and assigned the trial as `Category 1
        evidence' ("Based upon high-level evidence, there is uniform NCCN
        consensus that the intervention is appropriate") [c].
    
    The recommendations have been endorsed by the International Liver Cancer
      Association [d]. Subsequent national trials for biliary tract
      cancer must now examine new treatments in addition to
      gemcitabine/cisplatin [e]. The treatment is recommended on NHS
      Choices [f], and by Macmillan [g] as standard chemotherapy
      for biliary tract cancer. In August 2013, we surveyed 43 key centres
      treating biliary tract cancer, of whom 12 responded. All of these had
      adopted the new regime as standard of care, reporting improved survival
      and a well-tolerated regime. This amounted to over 230 patients treated [h].
    The ABC02 trial data were used to examine cost-effectiveness by an
      independent research group [i]. Total Quality Adjusted Life Years
      (QALYs) for gemcitabine/cisplatin (0.751) was greater than for gemcitabine
      alone (0.561), with total costs of $44,885 and $33,653 respectively.
      Gemcitabine/cisplatin had an incremental cost-effectiveness ratio of
      $59,480 per QALY gained, compared to gemcitabine alone. The authors
      concluded that the doublet therapy "is a cost-effective treatment
      alternative to gemcitabine monotherapy by currently accepted standards of
      willingness to pay".
    
ImpactSummary

    Before 2010, there was no accepted standard treatment for patients with
      advanced biliary tract cancer. The ABC02 trial showed that the combination
      of two drugs (gemcitabine and cisplatin) significantly improves survival,
      with acceptable side effects. Consequently, national and international
      guidelines have been revised to recommend this regimen as a standard of
      care. Furthermore, in ongoing trials of novel therapies,
      gemcitabine/cisplatin has become the comparator group, and the aim is to
      improve survival above what this can already achieve.
    
UnderpinningResearch

    The prognosis for patients with advanced biliary tract cancer
      (cholangiocarcinoma) is poor, with only half of them surviving to about
      eight months. UCL/UCLH is one of the main UK centres for treating these
      patients, and has been involved in several associated research projects
      over the years. One of these involved developing and participating in a
      randomised phase II study [1] to examine whether doublet
      chemotherapy (gemcitabine and cisplatin) is better than gemcitabine alone
      (UCL/UCLH Principal Investigator, Dr John Bridgewater, Consultant
      Oncologist; Chief Investigator Dr Juan Valle, Christie Hospital
      Manchester). This study showed very promising results for the doublet
      regimen, and was used to justify and design a large phase III trial
      (ABC02).
    ABC02 successfully received funding from Cancer Research UK, with
      Bridgewater as the Chief Investigator. Professor Allan Hackshaw (CRUK-UCL
      Cancer Trials Centre) had oversight of the design and statistical
      analyses. The trial concept originated from Bridgewater and Valle, with
      support through the NCRN Lower Gastrointestinal Cancer Clinical Studies
      Group. UCL was responsible for trial design, study conduct and statistical
      analyses, and was the trial Sponsor.
    This study was one of the first large scale national studies in biliary
      tract cancer in the UK, involving 37 recruiting hospitals (410 patients
      recruited 2002-8). It was independently peer-reviewed by Cancer Research
      UK, conducted across the UK National Cancer Research Networks (NCRN) and
      published in the New England Journal of Medicine [2]. These
      attributes confirm the high quality of this seminal trial.
    The ABC02 trial showed that the combination of two drugs (gemcitabine and
      cisplatin) significantly improves survival, with acceptable side effects.
      Following the success of ABC02, and the implementation of doublet therapy
      into routine care, UCL has designed, conducted and sponsored all
      subsequent UK national trials in biliary tract cancer developed through
      the NCRN Clinical Studies Group (ABC03, ABC04 and ABC05).
    