CaseStudyId: 29894
Title: 
    Improving prostate cancer diagnosis and care using computer simulation
        and medical image registration
    

ImpactDetails

    Prostate cancer is the most common male cancer in the UK, many countries
      in Europe, North America, and Australasia. The disease is a leading cause
      of cancer-related death in the western world.
    Dr. Barratt's development of novel criteria for diagnosing prostate
      cancer from computer modelling of needle biopsy has been of benefit to
      clinicians, men suspected of having prostate cancer, and men already
      diagnosed with the disease who require a comprehensive assessment of the
      extent and type of their disease prior to treatment. As a result of this
      research, clinicians now have access to clinical tools for
      implementing and validating MR-directed prostate biopsy as well as tools
      for accurately classifying patient risk and determining viable treatment
      options [a,b]. Patients directly benefit from this research
      through the significant improvement in accuracy of needle biopsy
        investigations, which in turn provides greater confidence when
        deciding between different treatment options [a,b].
    Development and adoption of clinical tools: From 2007
      onwards, Barratt's collaboration with clinicians at University College
      Hospital (UCH) led to new clinical criteria for image-directed biopsy
      using computer modelling of this procedure. For transperineal,
      template-guided biopsy mapping, these criteria were quickly adopted
        into clinical practice at UCH and from September 2009, applied to all
        patients undergoing this procedure, whether or not the patient was a
      volunteer within a clinical trial [b]. The criteria were also incorporated
      within an intuitive and easy-to- understand clinical classification
        scheme that also includes histological information on the
      aggressiveness of disease, measured by the so-called Gleason Grade. This
      scheme, commonly known as the "Traffic Light Scheme" and developed by
      clinicians in collaboration with Dr Barratt's team, provides a highly
      visual way of documenting patient risk by using a colour-coded system that
      is easily recognisable to patients. It has been found to be particularly
      useful during patient consultations as a means of allowing the patient to
      see where the burden of disease is and to make an informed choice,
      together with the clinician, about which treatment option to pursue [a,b].
    Since its introduction as part of the routine clinical protocol at UCH in
      2009, the Traffic Light scheme for classifying prostate cancer risk has determined
        the treatment options offered to more than 741 men with the disease
      who underwent a template-guided biopsy mapping before 31 July 2013 [b].
      This includes men treated under the NHS and privately both outside and
      inside ongoing clinical trials; the results of this test are often used to
      determine eligibility for clinical trials. The scheme is also used as part
      of the protocol of a major 3-year NHS/NIHR-sponsored Health Technology
      Assessment trial, the PROMISE trial, which began recruiting in 2012 and
      currently includes four centres in the UK. The aim of this study is to
      evaluate the clinical efficacy of MR in the diagnosis and characterisation
      of prostate cancer in a hospital setting in England and Wales. The trial
      has recruited 50 patients so far.
    The scheme was adopted by 15 centres in the UK and internationally
        between 2008 and 31 July 2013, including The Royal Marsden, St.
      Mary's (London), Bristol, Basingstoke and the Whittington Hospital, with
      plans for it to be introduced into all nine hospitals in the London Cancer
      Network by 2014. In Europe, the scheme is now used in hospitals in Zurich
      and Lausanne in Switzerland. The current estimate of the total number of
      patients whose treatment has been determined by this scheme is in excess
      of 1,200.
    As a further indication of the impact of this research on medical
      practice, a recent review of prostate cancer diagnosis [c], published in
      the influential British Medical Journal, also recommends that new
      biomarkers should be validated against the thresholds employed in this
      scheme, citing [output 4, above]. It is also anticipated that the scheme
      will be included as part of the national guidelines issued by the
        Royal College of Pathologists, which is currently under development
      and is due to be published in 2014 [b].
    Patient benefits: The MR-directed biopsy outlined above
      enables biopsy sampling that is sufficiently accurate for tumours to be
      targeted selectively. In this approach, tissue samples are collected only
      from regions that appear to be tumours in the MR images, which makes the procedure
        more efficient, more accurate, less invasive (and therefore posing a
        lower risk of infection), and cheaper compared with established biopsy
        techniques.
    Clinical trials: The image registration software that
      implements the techniques described in Section 2 is being used for
      targeted biopsy and therapy as part of two clinical trials. In one trial,
      the surgical value of using this software in an initial series of 24
      patients was analysed [d]. The results indicate that the use of the
      software to determine precisely where an MRI-visible tumour is located
      within ultrasound images obtained during the high-intensity focused
      ultrasound (HIFU) therapy led to a change in the surgical plan,
        determined using the standard clinical method, in half of the patients.
      In these patients, the size of the treated region was increased to
      ensure that the tumour was fully ablated. Clinical follow-up data are not
      yet available, but the longer-term impact of employing this technology is
      that the treatment is more effective than it would have been if
      performed using standard clinical methods in a substantial proportion of
      patients.
    To date, in fifty patients who went on to be treated using minimally
      invasive, MR-directed therapy within a clinical trial and as a result of
      criteria, the therapy was delivered using the image registration
      technology developed in this research [a]. The clinical experience with
      these patients is being used as evidence of clinical safety and efficacy
      as part of a submission for CE marking a commercial medical device that
      incorporates this technology.
    
ImpactSummary

    UCL's research has led to changes in patient care for men with prostate
      cancer, through the implementation of less invasive, image-directed
      treatment and diagnostic strategies, and clinical trials that use these
      techniques. The use of medical image registration software to deliver
      high- intensity ultrasound therapy in a targeted manner has been shown to
      change the treatment plan in half of the patients participating in a
      clinical study. New biopsy criteria are now used routinely to classify
      patient risk at University College Hospital, where, since 2009, clinicians
      have determined the treatment options for more than 741 prostate cancer
      patients. The scheme has been adopted, by 15 other hospitals in the UK and
      internationally, where it has become the recommended standard of care, and
      has been used to treat more than 1,200 patients.
    
UnderpinningResearch

    Dr. Barratt is an academic member of the UCL Centre for Medical Image
      Computing. His field of expertise includes medical image analysis,
      especially medical image registration, image processing, and computational
      modelling of soft-tissue organ motion and surgical procedures for the
      prediction and compensation of organ deformation in image-guided surgery
      systems. He has also applied computational modelling to investigate the
      expected efficacy of new surgical techniques. A key insight arising from
      the research he has conducted since 2007 is that three- dimensional (3D)
      computational models of soft-tissue and surgical instrument motion provide
      a powerful tool for solving conventionally challenging image registration
      problems in which structures move and deform between images. Such models
      also provide a powerful tool for simulating surgical procedures for the
      purposes of developing new clinical protocols to implement and interpret
      the results of those procedures. Specifically, statistical shape models
      that represent subject-specific variation in organ shape, for
      example, due to physical deformation when in contact with a surgical
      instrument, provide physically constrained representations that are
      helpful in regularising deformation fields computed by image registration
      algorithms.
    In Dr. Barratt's research, two novel approaches have been developed in
      close collaboration with clinicians at University College Hospital (UCH)
      [1-3]:
    Firstly, computational biomechanics (finite-element analysis) has been
      used to simulate organ deformations, given a static 3D mesh representation
      derived from a medical image. The resulting deformed shapes are used as
      synthetic training data for building a statistical shape/motion model.
      This approach is particularly useful for applications where the organ
      deformation cannot be quantified using imaging in advance, either because
      quantifying this deformation using imaging is not feasible or too
      expensive, or when physical deformations are due to instruments only used
      at the time of surgery. In such cases, prior information in the form of a
      pre-built 3D deformable organ model enables deformations to be predicted
      much more rapidly than applying finite-element methods directly. Potential
      problems of numerical instability and determination of boundary conditions
      from typically poor-quality intraoperative images are also avoided.
    Secondly, an algorithmic framework has been developed for registering
      deformable geometric organ models (for example, represented by a
      triangulated mesh) directly to images of the same organ. Again, this
      approach is particularly useful for surgical applications where a
      simplified, easy- to-interpret geometric representation of the organ of
      interest is ideal for surgical planning and transferring salient clinical
      data between different clinical teams. Models typically contain only
      information that is surgically relevant, such as tumour size, shape and
      location, and can be visualised easily using standard graphics hardware.
      Much of Dr. Barratt's research has focused on applying this approach to
      problems in prostate cancer biopsy and therapy, utilising patient-specific
      statistical shape/motion models of the prostate generated from magnetic
      resonance imaging (MRI) data [1-3].
    The clinical motivation for this work is problems encountered when
      attempting to validate and implement clinically an MRI-directed
      approach to prostate cancer diagnosis and treatment. In this approach,
      pathological and anatomical information from MRI images of the prostate
      obtained prior to a surgical procedure are used to plan and guide the
      procedure by superimposing a graphical representation of MRI-visible
      tumours onto real-time ultrasound images obtained during the procedure for
      the purposes of guidance. This overcomes the current limitation that most
      prostate tumours are not visible in ultrasound images and therefore
      targeting them is highly challenging without computer assistance. It also
      provides a cost-effective and accessible alternative to performing
      surgical procedures within an MRI scanner (i.e. under MRI guidance), which
      is prohibitively expensive and currently only available in a small number
      of centres across the world.
    As the research outlined above developed, and MRI-directed prostate
      needle biopsy applications were explored, further research was undertaken
      to apply computer modelling methods to simulate the biopsy procedure and
      to develop new criteria for estimating tumour burden (i.e. volume). This
      work involved the development of computer models of needle insertion,
      based on anatomical information obtained from pelvic MRI images, that
      included physical effects such as needle bending and image registration
      errors (estimated from work undertaken in other parts of the research
      programme as well as from the results of other research groups). Detailed
      3D geometric computer models of the prostate, including tumour size, shape
      and location, were reconstructed automatically from images of surgically
      excised prostate specimens using software developed by Dr. Barratt's
      research group. The software used image processing, combined with image
      registration, to detect tumour regions and re-orientate consecutive
      histological images [1-3].
    Three computer simulation studies were carried out between 2010 and 2012
      to:
    i) devise new criteria for estimating tumour burden from transperineal,
      template-guided biopsy samples [4];
    ii) compare different biopsy strategies for the detection of clinically
      important cancer (i.e. cancer that requires treatment) [5]; and
    iii) investigate and highlight issues associated with tumour-targeted
      biopsy, including the proposition of example new criteria, derived from
      computer simulations [6]. These studies are closely linked with the
      application of novel image registration techniques developed as part of
      the core research activity [1-3]. Such criteria are vitally important for
      patient management, since they dictate the treatment options available to
      patients as a result of undergoing this procedure.
    These computer simulation studies involved predicting the cancer core
      length of tissue sample &#8212; i.e. the length of cancerous tissue in
      millimetres &#8212; for different biopsy schemes, using 3D computer
      reconstructions from a historical database of histopathological images of
      a step-sectioned prostate specimens. The simulations took account of
      various sources of error, such as needle deflection, that can arise during
      a biopsy, and provided data for a statistical analysis from which cut-off
      criteria were determined to estimate disease burden.
    Key researchers: Dr Dean Barratt, Senior Lecturer (2007 -
      present); Dr. Yipeng Hu &#8212; Research Assistant and part-time PhD student
      (Oct 2007 - Sep 2012); Research Associate (Oct 2012- present); Dr. Tim
      Carter &#8212; Senior Research Associate (July 2009 - Sep 2011); Dr. Steven
      Thompson &#8212; Research Associate (Jan - Oct 2012); Professor David Hawkes -
      Professor of Imaging Science and Director of the UCL Centre for Medical
      Image Computing (2007- present)
    