CaseStudyId: 29895
Title: 
    xlinkit for fast, cheap, reliable banking with automated verification
        of over-the counter derivatives trading
    

ImpactDetails

    Since 2008, the adoption of FpML by the financial services sector has
      become widespread, with 95% of the financial market participants who deal
      in over-the-counter derivatives now using it at some stage in their
      trading process [a], benefiting from reduced costs and risks in their
      trading. Moreover, 22% of the non-financial market participants, such as
      vendors, implement the FpML validation rules defined with xlinkit. These
      firms have seen new revenue streams open for providing tools and services
      for FpML validation.
    The current Version 5.3 of the FpML Standard that is available for these
      market participants to use free of charge was released in October 2012. It
      now defines some 500 validation rules for a large number of equity,
      interest rate, credit, energy and foreign exchange derivatives. The first
      version of FpML to include validation rules was Version 4, which was
      released in April 2004. It had included some 15 validation rules for
      interest rate derivatives. These validation rules help clarify the meaning
      of derivative transactions defined in FpML and provide precise and
      unambiguous means for market participants who use FpML to electronically
      trade derivatives to validate the correctness of these transactions.
    The validation rules are included in the normative part of the standard,
      which means that the financial market participants that have adopted FpML
      will have to comply with these validation rules in their FpML messages.
      MessageAutomation provides a reference implementation of these rules using
      its xlinkit technology, which continues to be included in Version 5.3 of
      the FpML standard as an informative reference. As such it has informed
        the adoption of electronic processing between 2008 and 2013.
    The key beneficiaries of this impact are financial services
        institutions who trade in over-the- counter derivatives. ISDA found
      the volume of these transactions in the 12 months to July 2012 was $440
      trillion, about 200 times the annual GDP of the UK [b]. These participants
      benefit from the clarity and unambiguity introduced through the validation
      rules defined using UCL's consistency-checking technology.
    The ability to check whether a trade meets all relevant constraints
      automatically and therefore with minimal cost leads to a significant
        reduction in the time it takes to confirm these transactions, with
      fewer operations staff required. Financial market participants are exposed
      to market and credit risk during the period between a trade being agreed
      and its confirmation. This is why the time required to confirm trades is
      used as a key indicator of the operational efficiency of market
      participants in the ISDA's annual Operations Benchmark Surveys.
    The state of practice in derivatives processing at the beginning of the
      REF impact period is characterised in the 2007 ISDA Operations
      Benchmarking Survey [c]. The survey shows the distribution of confirmation
      delay, with between just 56-88% (depending on asset class) of trades being
      confirmed on the day after the trade had been agreed. Even after five days
      only 79-98% of trades had been confirmed. The 2007 survey did not
      distinguish between electronic and manual confirmations, and stated that
      many market participants were only planning the adoption of FpML for
      electronic confirmation in the near future. It is the manual confirmation
      processes, which include manual validation of these trades, which delay
      the confirmation.
    The impact of the widespread adoption of FpML during the REF period is
      demonstrated by the 2013 ISDA Operations Benchmarking Survey [d]. ISDA
      found a significant level of adoption of electronic confirmations
      for different classes of OTC derivatives. The 2013 survey shows that the
      adoption rate of electronic confirmations for all market participants was
      92% for interest rates derivatives, 100% for credit derivatives, 76% for
      equity derivatives, 82% for currency derivatives and 77% for commodity
      derivatives. It then shows that confirmation occurred on the same day for
      between 75-85% of the transactions, depending on asset class and that for
      all but credit derivatives 100% of the confirmations had been sent the
      following day. For credit derivatives 98% were confirmed the following day
      and 100% the day after. The survey also states that the time for manual
      confirmations takes between six and ten days depending on asset class.
    Thus the substantial introduction of electronic confirmation with FpML,
      which can be validated automatically, has reduced manual effort and
        brought down the time required to confirm derivative transactions from
        up to 10 days to at most one day. This reduction means there is also
      a substantial reduction in the period during which a financial market
        participant is subject to market and credit risk because a contract
      is not yet confirmed. Given the value of these transactions confirmed by
      the FpML surveys, this risk reduction is very significant.
    Some financial market participants have stated these benefits publicly.
      In a press release issued on 25 April 2010, Citigroup announced its
      adoption of FpML and stated "Benefits include ease of validation for
        correctness and completeness of data, ease of processing, ease of
        deployment and lower processing costs" [e]. In 2007, the Society for
      Worldwide Interchange of Financial Transactions (SWIFT), announced the
      adoption of FpML for derivative messaging on its SwiftNet and confirmed
      validation as one of its benefits. The first FpML message was traded and
      validated on SwiftNet in July 2008, enabling firms that use their products
      to reduce costs and risks. A senior vice president at SwiftNet's
      client Brown Brothers Harriman said: "The primary benefit we have achieved
      is improved operational risk management... Manually keying in
      instructions is fraught with risk of errors, where incorrect information
      could go into an accounting system and be used to strike a NAV [net asset
      value] for a fund." [f]
    Many financial market participants have implemented the FpML validation
      rules in a proprietary manner. In addition, there are at least six
      commercially available implementations of the rules. One of these
      implementations was built by Systemwire, the UCL spinout. Systemwire's
      FpML validator became ISDA's reference implementation, which has informed
      a number of FpML implementation projects between 2008-2013 that were
      required to achieve the benefit of reduced trade confirmation times [g].
    In 2004, Systemwire was acquired through trade sale by Message
      Automation, a London-based specialist in financial trading systems.
      Message Automation still markets the implementation of the FpML validation
      rules in a product called Validator, part of its futureLANDSCAPE solution.
      This enables the financial community to significantly reduce operational
      risk and cost by imposing market standard and internal controls on the
      quality of data moving around an organisation. The CEO of Message
      Automation says: "The Validator tool was launched in 2008 as part of the
      Message Automation solution set which has been adopted by several leading
      international financial institutions. These include HSBC, Lloyds Banking
      Group, Nomura, Credit Suisse, Royal Bank of Canada, Fidelity Investments,
      Deutsche Bank and RBS. The futureLANDSCAPE solution set has generated in
      excess of &#163;3 million of revenues for Message Automation Ltd., with a
      significant percentage in the form of exports." [h]. [text removed for
      publication]
    
ImpactSummary

    The Software Systems Engineering Group at UCL developed and patented
      xlinkit, an approach that supports the validation of XML documents in
      general and over-the-counter (OTC) derivative transactions expressed in
      the Financial Products Markup Language (FpML) in particular. The
      widespread adoption of FpML (95% of financial market participants now use
      it for OTC transactions) has brought about a substantial reduction in
      market and credit risk for financial institutions, by reducing the time
      required to confirm derivative transactions from up to 10 days to at most
      one day. In the year to June 2012 about $440 trillion OTC transactions
      were executed worldwide. [text removed for publication]. Message
      Automation, which markets a product including tools based on that patent,
      has received &#163;3 million revenue in the same period.
    
UnderpinningResearch

    The background of the research that led to xlinkit was Professor Wolfgang
      Emmerich and Professor Anthony Finkelstein's work on consistency
      management of structured and semi- structured software engineering
      artifacts. The consistency management of such documents required the
      representation of abstract syntax trees and graphs, the definition of
      validation rules to define static semantics and inter-document consistency
      constraints, and the construction of validation engines that can execute
      these rules.
    The adoption of internet standards for managing semi-structured
      documents, most notably XML, opened the possibility to apply similar
      techniques to documents other than those developed during software
      development processes. The Document Object Model (DOM) defines how such
      semi- structured documents are represented in DOM trees, which are very
      similar in nature to abstract syntax trees. Thus from 1998, the UCL
      Software Systems Engineering Research Group began to explore whether the
      principles, methods and techniques for consistency management of software
      engineering artifacts could be realised more elegantly using the emerging
      family of standards on XML that were being defined at the same time by the
      World Wide Web Consortium (W3C), thereby making them applicable to a
      broader application area and semi-structured documents that are managed in
      a decentralised manner.
    A decentralised setting necessitated the management of consistency
      relationships out of bounds from the documents that are being related. The
      emerging XLink standard of the W3C enabled the management of such
      out-of-bound relationships and the research focused on how such XLink
      relationships could be defined and created in an effective and efficient
      manner.
    xlinkit defines a first order rule language, which combines universal and
      existential quantification with boolean logic operators over path
      expressions defined using the XPath standard. Through further work,
      researchers under the supervision of Professors Emmerich and Finkelstein
      then developed several denotational semantics to indicate how the xlinkit
      language can be interpreted. A first interpretation shows how the language
      can be used to define whether two distributed semi- structured documents
      are consistent with each other [1]. A second semantics defines how this
      language can be used to infer the out-of-bound links that capture
      consistency relationships between elements in two semi-structured
      distributed documents [1]. A third interpretation defines how the language
      can be used for two distributed documents that are inconsistent with each
      other to calculate all possible modifications that render them consistent
      again [3]. The initial application of this research was to demonstrate how
      to manage the consistency of software engineering documents [2,4].
    Once the wide applicability of the basic research on consistency
      management using XML technologies became evident, UCL protected the IP of
      the underlying research through patenting it in the US and UK [6]. UCL
      then created a spin-out company called Systemwire, appointed a CEO to this
      spin-out and moved to develop a commercial implementation of the research
      results. This implementation became available in early 2002.
    During spring 2002, UBS, UCL and Systemwire proposed the creation of the
      FpML Validation Working Group to the International Swaps and Derivatives
      Association (ISDA), which was submitted in June 2002 [7]. ISDA accepted
      the proposal and the FpML Validation working group was created in autumn
      2003. It was chaired by Christian Nentwich, Wolfgang Emmerich's PhD
      student and had wide industry participation from BNP Paribas, Deutsche
      Bank, Barclays Capital, UBS and JP Morgan. The Validation working group
      then used the xlinkit language called Constraint Language in XML (clix) to
      formulate consistency rules for derivative transactions defined using the
      FpML standard [5].
    The principal researchers were Professor Wolfgang Emmerich (Lecturer in
      Computer Science, now Professor of Distributed Computing, at UCL since
      1997) and Professor Anthony Finkelstein (Professor of Software Systems
      Engineering since 1997).
    