CaseStudyId: 29890
Title: 
    Camino diffusion MRI toolkit: microstructure imaging and connectivity
        mapping to avoid cognitive deficits after neurosurgery
    

ImpactDetails

    The key area for impact of the Camino toolkit and the research it
      implements is on patients undergoing neurosurgery. The research has
      enabled neurosurgeons to visualise white matter fibre pathways, which form
      the communication network of the brain, prior to their intervention. This
      helps them avoid cutting these fibres during the operation, helping
        patients avoid severe cognitive deficits unrelated to the original
      problem that led to the surgery.
    Source [a] provides general corroboration for this claim stating that the
      more complete knowledge of brain connectivity that arose from Alexander's
      atlasing work documented in output [2] generally supports neurosurgeons to
      ensure better post-operative outcomes for their patients. The atlas in
      output [2] underpinned the discovery of new connections in the brain
      documented in Catani et al (see [a]). The report by Benzagmout et al in
      [a] is from 2007, but the impact on patients continues to the present, as
      the knowledge that arose from Alexander's atlasing work, via Catani et al,
      is now common among surgeons performing such operations and used to avoid
      brain damage during intervention.
    The following describes two more specific examples of supporting evidence
      for the impact of Camino on brain surgeons and their patients:
    Improved outcomes for epilepsy patients: Surgeons use tractography
      algorithms, specifically that published in output [3], and refined and
      implemented in the Camino toolkit, to recover pathways of white matter
      fibres in the brain from pre-operative MRI scans. An image acquisition and
      analysis system is in place in the National Hospital for Neurology and
      Neurosurgery (NHNN) in London specifically to support neurosurgeons making
      anterior temporal lobe resections (they cut away brain tissue to remove
      the seizure focus) to cure refractory epilepsy (cases in which standard
      medicines do not control seizures). They use the system on roughly one
      patient a week and it has been fully operational since mid-2012 [b],
      although a preliminary version was in clinical use for about a year prior
      to that. The system helps surgeons avoid damaging fibre pathways,
      which can otherwise lead to visual deficits that would, for example,
      prevent driving.
    The system itself is documented in [c]. It relies on the experiment
      design optimisation in output [5] for image data acquisition as well as
      the tractography algorithm in output [3] implemented in Camino. Early
      evaluation of the system (see [b]) demonstrates its impact by using the
      system in 21 patients undergoing anterior temporal lobe resection. The
      outcomes are compared to a control group who underwent the same surgery
      without the system. None of those who had their visual pathway displayed
      to the surgeon via the Camino-based system had a visual field deficit that
      would prevent driving, compared to 13% in the control group. The
      experiment shows a significantly better retention of visual skills in
        the patients operated on using the system.
    The impact came about through Alexander establishing a collaboration in
      2004 with the epilepsy group at NHNN, which began to use Camino in their
      research into ways of ameliorating neurological deficit after
      neurosurgery. The surgical-support system they now use was engineered at
      UCL in collaboration with the epilepsy group at NHNN using the Camino
      toolkit largely as an off- the-shelf software library. As of mid-2013,
      around 140 patients have benefited from surgery at NHNN performed by
      Camino tractography, which the head of NHNN confirms is of "enormous
      importance for improving the precision and safety of neurosurgical
      treatment." [b]
    Improved outcomes for brain tumour patients: Since 2012,
      neurosurgeons in Milan have been using tractography based on the NODDI
      technique in place of existing connectivity mapping for planning
      interventions to remove brain tumours. As in the epilepsy surgery
      described above, this helps surgeons avoid damaging white matter pathways
      so the impact on patients is that they are less likely to have
        unrelated post-surgical cognitive deficits. Common cognitive
      deficits resulting from brain tumour resection are verbal, sensory, or
      motor problems; surgical planning informed by tractography reduces the
      likelihood and severity of these deficits. The surgeons have been
      experimenting with off-the-shelf tractography for some time for
      presurgical planning. They switched to using NODDI tractography in 2012,
      because it reveals "white matter fibres in the vicinity of tumours
        much more clearly than conventional tractography, because it is less
      vulnerable to pathological effects, such as oedema, which arise commonly
      in and around brain tumours. This is a significant benefit to surgeons
      planning brain tumour resections, because they get a much clearer picture
      of white matter pathways near the tumour." (from source [d]). They have
      now imaged around 130 brain-tumour patients using NODDI, about 80 of whom
      went on to surgical intervention planned via NODDI tractography (see [d]).
    Within the CONNECT consortium Alexander established a range of
      collaborations around Europe to develop microstructure imaging techniques
      and translate them to clinical practice. A neuroradiologist who was
      involved in the same consortium, and works closely with brain surgeons in
      Milan, picked up on the NODDI technique and began using it, under the
      guidance of the Camino team, in particular Gary Zhang, for tractography in
      brain tumour patients. He discovered the benefits in connectivity mapping
      in the vicinity of tumours, which led to its direct application for
      planning interventions on brain tumour patients.
    
ImpactSummary

    Professor Alexander's work on diffusion magnetic resonance imaging (MRI)
      modelling and processing has had significant and lasting impact on medical
      practice. In particular, neurosurgical support systems rely on his work to
      map the major connection pathways in the brain, helping the surgeons avoid
      damaging them during intervention. Specific examples are in epilepsy,
      where, since 2010, surgeons perform about one operation per week using
      these systems, and brain tumour resection, where surgeons in Milan have
      since early 2013 been using a similar system based on UCL's latest
      microstructure imaging techniques. The key impact is on patients, whose
      likelihood of permanent post-operative deficits in, for example, visual,
      verbal or motor skills, is significantly reduced.
    
UnderpinningResearch

    In the early 1990s, a new magnetic resonance imaging technique was
      developed, called diffusion tensor imaging (DTI), which enables
      reconstruction of the connectivity of the brain through a subsequent
      computational image analysis process called tractography. While
      revolutionary for neuroscience, the technique has several fundamental
      limitations that cause problems for widespread adoption in clinical
      practice. The body of research that underpins the impact documented here
      aimed to ameliorate those limitations by developing alternative
      computational imaging, modelling, and data analysis techniques that
      provide more complete information to support brain connectivity mapping.
    Substantial additional effort went into making all the advances freely
      available to the research community and beyond. This was achieved through
      the Camino diffusion MRI software toolkit www.camino.org.uk,
      which was first released in 2004. Daniel Alexander (Professor of Imaging
      Science) led this research effort and the development of the Camino
      toolkit during his employment at UCL, which started in January 2000. The
      one-page abstract [4] gathers general citations for the toolkit, although
      many go to the original papers on the techniques implemented in Camino.
      However, the website gives a better feel for the latest contents and
      utility.
    Alexander's work on diffusion tensor image warping algorithms [1],
      enabling the construction of statistical atlases over groups [2], began in
      1999 while he was at the University of Pennsylvania and continued after
      his arrival at UCL in 2000 until final publication in 2001. Exploitation
      of the work within the academic community began through collaborations,
      for example with Derek Jones, then at King's College London and now
      Professor at Cardiff University, and Lewis Griffin, then researcher at
      King's College London and now Senior Lecturer in Computer Science at UCL.
      That collaboration led to [2], which constructed the first group-averaged
      atlas of diffusion tensor images.
    From 2001-2005 Alexander worked on a range of tractography algorithms for
      reconstructing brain connectivity from magnetic resonance images [3].
      These particular tractography algorithms were the first to exploit the new
      generation of computational models and data processing algorithms coming
      out of Alexander's work that recover multiple fibre orientations in each
      image voxel (DTI can recover only one so fails at fibre crossings). He
      worked closely with Geoff Parker, now at Manchester University, to
      incorporate these algorithms into tractography; see for example [3].
    From 2005 onwards, Alexander has had a significant research effort on
      experiment design optimisation algorithms for diffusion MRI; output [5] is
      one example. Specifically, he developed a range of optimisation algorithms
      to improve the experiment design in various diffusion MRI techniques and
      thus improve the precision and accuracy of the information it provides. In
      output [5] below, for example, he used simulated annealing to determine an
      optimal ordering for measurement acquisition that makes data usable even
      if only part of the full data set is acquired. This is particularly useful
      in clinical applications where patients sometimes demand to get out of the
      scanner before the acquisition is complete; without the optimisation, the
      data is then unusable.
    The development of microstructure imaging techniques is a major on-going
      research effort for Alexander, which started in 2007. It has produced
      various new imaging techniques that add a variety of important new kinds
      of information beyond DTI. The research effort involves the construction
      of mathematical and computational models for the diffusion MRI signal,
      implementation of a variety of model fitting and model selection
      techniques, as well as the development of sophisticated simulation systems
      for testing and validation. One particular technique, called NODDI [6], is
      designed for clinical application, which has led to clinical impact, as
      described later. The research started in 2011 and was led by Alexander in
      collaboration with Gary Zhang, then a post-doc at UCL, who became lecturer
      in 2012, as well as Claudia Wheeler- Kingshott (Reader) and Torben
      Schneider (post-doc) at the Institute of Neurology at UCL. NODDI improves
      on DTI by providing biologically specific parameters, such as the density,
      direction and dispersion of neural fibres at each location in the brain.
    