CaseStudyId: 29897
Title: 
    A clinical management service for stroke prevention
    

ImpactDetails

    The research described in section 2 has led to widespread benefits to
        patients and healthcare providers, along with the adoption of a new ISO
        standard for electronic health records. Healthcare providers in
      south-east England have adopted a new anticoagulation management
        technology, which is unique in the UK [a]. This has been
      commercialised by the new UCL spinout company Helicon Health.
    The success of the Helicon Heart stroke prevention service is crucially
      enabled by distributed teams of clinicians having access to a shared and
      medico-legally robust EHR for every patient, which meets all of the
      requirements, standards and architectural features summarised in Section
      2. Helicon Heart tailors UCL's complete ISO EN 13606 conformant EHR
      implementation specifically to cardiovascular shared care. It incorporates
      a care plan for patients at risk, especially those needing preventive
      anticoagulation treatment, and provides computerised decision support to
      ensure that care is optimally managed.
    The use of Helicon's stroke prevention and anticoagulation management
      system is important because each patient has a narrow and unique safe
      dosage window, subject to variation over time, which can be influenced by
      lifestyle changes, other medications and certain foods; it therefore
      requires regular blood test monitoring (every few weeks) and careful dose
      adjustments. Both too high and too low a level of anticoagulation can lead
      to serious or fatal haemorrhages, or stroke. Anticoagulants are one of the
      three classes of drugs most commonly associated with fatal medication
      errors in the UK, and in the top five in the US and Australia. The NHS
      Litigation Authority has reported that medication errors involving
      anticoagulants fall within the top ten causes of claims against NHS trusts
      [b], and have amongst the highest litigation cost of any NHS treatment: in
      the UK, an average of fifty patients per year experience serious adverse
      events arising from preventable warfarin-induced complications; ten of
      those patients die. In financial terms, every prevented stroke saves the
      NHS &#163;16,000 per annum [c]; the estimated saving to each CCG is
      approximately &#163;500,000 per annum, to which the Helicon Heart service makes
      a significant contribution, as discussed below.
    Following the successful evaluation of a pilot version in 2004 [d], the
      EHR repository was enhanced for greater resilience and performance, and
      the clinical application enriched following user feedback. It was
      installed in the Whittington Hospital and accessed by an early adopter
      community of GPs and high street pharmacists; it went into full clinical
      use from August 2008 [e]. Helicon Heart is now being used by 5 NHS
      Clinical Commissioning Groups (CCG) across north London and Hertfordshire,
      covering 2 Hospital Trusts, 30 General Practice delivery sites and 3
      Community Pharmacies (including Boots). The system underpins clinical
        care for 3,000 at-risk patients, and Helicon Health has secured
      additional contracts to extend this to 4,500 patients from 2014 [f]. This
      shared EHR system facilitates collaboration between community staff
        and hospital specialists [g, h, i], and has enabled the Whittington
      Hospital to transfer over 600 patients over the last few years from
        the more inconvenient and expensive hospital service to a more local
      GP or Community Pharmacy service, whilst being able to continue to remotely
        monitor their quality of care [a]. This has released capacity in the
      hospital for the referral of new and often more complicated patients. A
      member of the Haringey Clinical Commissioning Group said the service,
      which the CCG has been using throughout the impact period, "provided a
      safe option for monitoring INRs1 in primary care. It provides the
        commissioners, providers and patients with information that assures them
        of the quality of the service being provided" [h]. This service was
        highlighted in the NHS Customer Service Excellence award made to the
        Whittington Cardiovascular Department. It commended the community-based
        anticoagulant and stroke prevention service as a "transformational
        service" to the Cabinet Office [j].
    Now that the system is widely distributed across many sites, clinical
      governance is vital. A Clinical Governance Board oversees the quality and
      safety, for which Helicon Heart generates real-time clinical
        governance quality measures, which is possible because of the
      high-quality and comprehensive EHR data it contains. This information is a
      huge asset for the clinical governance process and provides great learning
      opportunities for different general practices who can compare each others'
      quality performance. The governance data show that most of the hospital,
      GP and pharmacy sites are maintaining satisfactory anticoagulation control
      metrics and are improving year on year. The system has helped to
      demonstrate that community sites deliver safe and well-regarded care [h].
      This is particularly appreciated by patients, for whom a visit to their GP
      or local community pharmacy is usually much more convenient than being
      treated as a hospital outpatient. An independent patient satisfaction
      study was commissioned in 2009, undertaken by UCL staff who are world
      experts in health technology assessments but had no prior connection to
      this project. They showed that patients unanimously favoured the new
        anticoagulation service, which they found to be more convenient, had
      shorter waiting times, required a minimally invasive test (less bruising),
      and led to them getting the results and treatment instructions immediately
      [g]. They could take away a clear and well-structured paper summary of
      their condition, care and treatment that could also be shown to any other
      care provider.
    Creation of spin-out company: In May 2012, UCL Business and
      Whittington Health formed the spin-out company, Helicon Health, to support
      the roll out of anticoagulation and stroke prevention services (Helicon
      Heart) including the EHR system, decision support and clinical governance
      [k]. The company employs 10 people and generated &#163;200,000 income in its
      first year. This company has joint funded with UCL the enrichment of the
      Helicon Heart system to cover atrial fibrillation management, another
      critical factor in stroke prevention, which was completed in May 2013. [f]
    Wider adoption of ISO standard: ISO EN 13606 is the only
      internationally endorsed standard for communicating EHRs between
      heterogeneous systems. Countries that have publicly adopted the ISO EN
      13606 EHR interoperability standard since its publication in 2008 include
      the UK (NHS England), Sweden, Spain and Brazil. It is, however, mandatory
      in all EU countries. Countries still considering its adoption include
      Norway, Ireland, Japan, Korea, Rwanda and Australia. Several EHR vendors
      have chosen to use it as the basis for their EHR systems. These standards
      are now being adopted by the NHS for its logical record architecture: for
      example, every week over 11,000 patients change their general practice in
      England safe in the knowledge their whole life general practice record
      will be available at their first consultation with their new GP using ISO
      EN 13606 based messages.
    
ImpactSummary

    Helicon Health is a UCL spin-out company providing a stroke prevention
      clinical management service (Helicon Heart) developed through UCL health
      informatics research. In partnership with Whittington Health, a large
      north London hospital, Helicon Heart provides stroke prevention management
      to 5 NHS Clinical Commissioning Groups (CCG) across north London and
      Hertfordshire, covering 2 Hospital Trusts, 30 General Practice delivery
      sites and 3 Community Pharmacies. The system underpins clinical care for
      3,000 at-risk patients, and Helicon Health has secured additional
      contracts to extend this to 4,500 patients in 2014. Every prevented stroke
      saves the NHS &#163;16,000 per annum; the estimated saving to each CCG is
      approximately &#163;500,000 per annum, to which the Helicon Heart service makes
      a significant contribution.
    
UnderpinningResearch

    Clinical information is recognised to be highly complex, knowledge
      intensive and contextual. Tens of billions of pounds in eHealth programme
      investments across the world over the past decade have still not delivered
      in any country a scalable means of capturing and communicating a unified
      Electronic Health Record (EHR) for each patient. The representation of
      EHRs comprehensively, interoperably and in a medico-legally robust way is
      one of the fundamental challenges of health informatics.
    Since 1996 UCL has led European research to develop an EHR information
      architecture (information models, knowledge models, persistence
      architecture and services) to represent "cradle to grave" EHR information.
      This research has directly led to international requirements
      specifications and interoperability standards for a federated architecture
      to consolidate EHR data from multiple heterogeneous clinical systems in a
      semantically coherent way, including the representation of healthcare
      context and provenance to ensure medico-legally acceptable interpretation.
      Dipak Kalra (Professor of Health Informatics, at UCL since 1995) has led
      much of this research, which has spanned 14 EC, EPSRC and MRC funded
      projects, totalling &#163;44 million to date, with partners from many European
      countries from academia, industry, healthcare organisations, health
      insurers and health ministries. The UCL component of this funding was &#163;5.6
      million and resulted in publications from UCL on:
    
      formally specified requirements for EHR representation and
        interoperability [1];
      information models (in Unified Modeling Language, UML) for the
        representation of clinical meaning, provenance and context within EHRs
        [2];
      access control and privacy protection frameworks to support
        differential access policies within an EHR federation;
      the challenges and best approaches to enable semantic
        interoperability;
      comprehensive Service Oriented Architecture (SOA) to enable
        componentised implementation and deployment [3,4];
      interfacing the EHR to decision support algorithms and components;
      optimising repository (persistence) design to enable high-performance
        query and retrieval; the integration of clinical advisory components
        within EHRs to support evidence-based and safe clinical practice;
      the re-use of federated EHR repositories as a research platform.
    
    On the basis of this research, in 2002 Professor Kalra was appointed to
      lead standards development Project Teams in CEN (the European Committee
      for Standardization) and ISO (the International Organization for
      Standardization) on the electronic health record, which have published 12
      requirements and interoperability standards in this area since 2008, such
      as ISO 13606 Part 1 [5].
    In order to ensure that these standards are in practice technically
      implementable, that the ISO 13606 EHR specifications do meet clinical care
      requirements and that fully functioning clinical systems can be built on
      top of these EHRs, Professor Kalra established a software engineering
      research team led by Dr Tony Austin (Principal Research Associate, at UCL
      since 1997). This team has implemented the full set of international EHR
      interoperability standards, together with a rapid application development
      platform to enable specific clinical applications (for any speciality or
      care setting) to be designed and developed [6]. This has enabled the EHR
      repository and services to, in effect, be profiled and deployed in
      particular usage scenarios and yet always to maintain a complete EHR for
      each patient across all of the deployment settings. The largest deployment
      (now branded as Helicon Heart) supports shared care for anticoagulation
      and stroke prevention between hospitals and GPs across north London and
      East Hertfordshire. The system includes a decision support middleware
      component that improves anticoagulation control and reduces the risk of
      complications. The middleware is implemented in Java, backed by a
      PostgresQL database and web service infrastructure, deployed on servers
      hosted inside the NHS firewall (therefore meeting stringent NHS standards)
      and is collaboratively supported by the UCL research team and NHS IT
      staff. There are additional deployments of the (same) EHR system for
      managing dementia.
    The evaluation feedback from these clinical settings has informed the
      standardisation processes and also led to an iterative maturing of the UCL
      EHR products.
    