CaseStudyId: 29926
Title: 
    Research into trimaran hullforms exploited in novel ship designs by
      commercial and naval shipping
    

ImpactDetails

    The global impact of research undertaken in trimaran ships by the Marine
      Research Group at UCL
      over the past 20 years, which influenced Classification Design Rules for
      Trimaran Ships, can be
      identified in the period 2008-13 by considering how RV Triton has been
      adopted as a tropical patrol
      vessel and the building of new trimaran ships, notably the Independence
        Class of littoral combat
      ships for the US Navy [f] and the introduction of a new trimaran-variant
      car ferry.
    As described in Section 2, initial research into ocean-going trimaran
      vessels was undertaken at
      UCL with a focus on structure, form, seakeeping, resistance, and
      propulsion arrangements. This
      led to the building of a research vessel RV Triton, which was sold
      in 2002 after having completed
      extensive trials. Over the past 5+ years it has been used by the
      Australian Customs and Border
      Protection Service (ACBP) as a coastal patrol and fisheries protection
      vessel on the northern
      tropical coast of Australia. ACV Triton was refitted with additional
      accommodation, a more powerful
      propulsion plant, and a command and control centre which was easily
      facilitated within its trimaran
      hullform, which itself remained unchanged. Triton was selected over
      alternative equivalent
      monohull vessels for the patrol role because the trimaran hullform that
      UCL designed offers lower
      resistance, improved sea-keeping and improved larger upper deck area,
      which enhances
      operational capability. These advantages manifest themselves in achieving
      a superior range and
      improved fuel economy resulting from its inherently lower resistance;
      higher operating speeds
      which is important to the ACBP since the ships are used to catch
      smugglers; and its large working
      deck area which allows for multiple operations of helicopters and boats.
      Overall, the impact of
      using a trimaran in this role has provided enhanced capability at lower
      fuel consumption and
      reduced emissions over similar sized monohull or catamaran vessels [a].
    At the end of the Cold War the US Navy determined a need for new ship
      types to combat
      asymmetrical littoral (close to shore) threats and the littoral combat
      ship (LCS) concept was born.
      In 2010, Austal's USS Independence was the first modular
      high-speed trimaran LCS to be
      commissioned into the US Navy; this was followed in 2012 by USS
        Coronado, a second trimaran
      vessel of similar design that completed trials in August 2013. Four more
      trimaran Independence
        Class vessels have been ordered since 2008, including USS
        Jackson, construction of which began
      in 2012 [d], and eventually a fleet of 20+ LCS trimaran vessels are
      expected [b]. An important
      economic benefit of the trimaran LCS programme has been to support jobs at
      Austal in Alabama,
      USA, which has been able to double its workforce to 3,800 [e]. In 2010,
      the Navy awarded Austal a
      $432-million contract to build a trimaran LCS, with a further $681-million
      contract for two more
      ships awarded in March 2013 [b, c].
    The trimaran Independence Class LCS design has been tested
      thoroughly by the US Navy and
      shown to provide significant benefits to naval operations, including the
      largest usable payload
      volume per tonne of ship displacement of all US Navy surface combatants, a
      large flight deck that
      has facilitated near simultaneous operation of two helicopters and proven
      capability of operating
      the large H-53 helicopter, and operations of multiple unmanned vehicles
      for reconnaissance and
      warfare operations. The increased stability of the trimaran hullform has
      improved flight operations
      by allowing them to be achieved in higher sea-states than equivalent-sized
      monohulls and
      catamarans. Other operational benefits result from the ability of the
      trimaran configuration to
      effectively decouple the resistance/powering from the stability relative
      to an equivalent monohull
      which can yield a reduction in resistance at higher speeds. The subsequent
      reduction in the
      vessel's full-speed power requirements allows a corresponding reduction of
      around one-third in
      both fuel consumption and associated emissions [c]. Chief of Naval
      Operations Adm. Gary
      Roughead praised the Navy's plan to add both ship designs to the fleet
      [2010]: "The LCS is
        uniquely designed to win against 21st century threats in coastal waters
        posed by increasingly
        capable submarines, mines and swarming small craft. Both designs provide
        the capabilities our
        Navy needs, and each offers unique features that will provide fleet
        commanders with a high level of
        flexibility in employing these ships." [c]
    The trimaran concept is also useful for commercial vessels: the trimaran
      ferry Benchijigua Express
      entered service in 2005 and has been successfully used to carry cars and
      passengers between the
      Canary Islands throughout the REF impact period. The design of the ferry,
      also built by Austal,
      draws on the experimental results UCL obtained from its role in the
      development of RV Triton [h].
      In common with other trimaran designs, the reduced resistance resulting
      from its three slender
      hullforms means the ferry uses much less fuel at its high speed (40+ knot
      operation) when
      compared to an equivalent-sized catarmaran or monohull, which confers an
      important advantage in
      the competitive ferry market [i]. Benchijigua Express ferry's
      improved stability also ensures a softer
      roll, enhancing passenger comfort. Auto-Express, the second
      generation of trimaran passenger
      ferries launched in 2012, offers further benefits still. The improved
      design has resulted in an
      increased waterline length providing improved internal volume and a speed
      of 39 knots [g].
      According to the Head of Research and Development at Austal: "The
        trimaran offers greater speed
        for the same cargo weight and the same power compared to a monohull and
        a catamaran. It's got
        better passenger comfort, by which I mean less sea-sickness. It's got a
        better sea-keeping ability &#8212;
        able to operate in higher sea states... The power consumption is
        reduced about 20% when
        operating in a seaway compared to a catamaran...and reduced by as much
        as 50% when
        compared with a monohull operating in waves..." [g].
    The rules governing the design of ships (naval and commercial) are
      predominantly the
      responsibility of national Classification Societies such as Lloyds
      Register (LR) for UK. New
      Classification Society Rules for Trimaran Ships were developed in 2004,
      with UCL involvement
      and drawing on expertise developed during the research described in
      Section 2. Since 2008, the
      Marine Research Group at UCL has been assisting LR with the approval of
      new rules governing
      naval vessel designs including structure and propulsion, thereby providing
      the foundations that
      enable ship builders to offer trimaran ships to their customers. Transfer
      of specialist advice based
      on our research has been effected via Professor Bucknall's provision of
      expertise into the LR Naval
      Rules Technical Committee, of which he is a member [i].
    
ImpactSummary

    A number of trimaran ocean-going ships, based on original designs
      conceived by UCL researchers,
      are currently in use. RV Triton, the demonstrator trimaran, is
      presently employed as a patrol vessel to
      provide Australian Customs and Border Protection with increased capability
      and lower fuel consumption
      compared to a monohull. The Independence Class of littoral combat
      ships currently entering service in
      the US Navy offers improved military capability and one-third lower fuel
      consumption, with the ensuing
      benefit of creating almost 2,000 jobs at the shipbuilder, Austal.
      Similarly, trimaran ferries with their
      inherent stability have improved passenger comfort and their reduced fuel
      consumption has lowered
      operating costs.
    
UnderpinningResearch

    Research at UCL into trimaran hullforms for ocean-going ships was
      initially stimulated through
      examining trimaran performance in smaller vessels, notably yachts e.g.
      America's Cup and
      powerboats e.g. Ilan Voyager, which won the coveted `Round Britain
      Speed Boat' record in 1990.
      UCL developed the ocean-going trimaran ship concept and led research
      activities in this field from
      initial concept through design, computational and experimental research
      and analysis of ship trials,
      along with contributions to a Classification Societies Ship Design Rules.
    The university received its first funding for this work in 1993 and the
      first study of trimaran ship
      design demonstrated real advantages over monohull ships in the areas of
      layout, survivability and
      powering. The trimaran consists of three parallel slim hullforms joined
      using a cross-deck structure
      rather than a single wider monohull. Research at UCL demonstrated, through
      a series of
      computational and experimental research studies, that the trimaran
      hullform offers lower resistance
      at high speeds and a wide deck area. Further ship research had a specific
      focus on exploring naval
      architectural characteristics of the configuration, such as stability and
      roll characteristics [1]. The
      concept was then taken up in the UK Ministry of Defence (MoD) with a major
      design study that
      involved an extensive programme of experimental and design research
      centring on a scaled 6-metre
      trimaran model of a 3,000-tonne destroyer, designed at UCL and tested at
      the Haslar
      Towing Tank (see references included in [2]). The results of this
      experimental research work were
      considered sufficiently promising for the Defence Evaluation and Research
      Agency (DERA) to
      build an ocean-going two-thirds-scale Trimaran Technology Demonstrator.
      The demonstrator,
      named Research Vessel Triton, was principally built to de-risk the
      structural design. However, it
      was heavily instrumented to provide data on motions and sea-keeping
      performance too. Ultimately
      it was critical to the procurement process considering whether the new
      trimaran configuration could
      provide better value for money than the conventional monohull for the
      Royal Navy's Future Surface
      Combatant.
    RV Triton was built by Vosper Thornycroft, Southampton, UK in 1998
      and accepted in 2000 when it
      commenced an extensive series of trials for design and operational
      performance, e.g. sea-keeping
      and helicopter operations. The project included UCL evaluation to compare
      actual and predicted
      performance and substantial US Navy involvement such as to monitor
      structural bending [3]. Also
      around this period research was undertaken at UCL to explore the
      challenges of marine
      engineering the trimaran hullform. High-power propulsion plants are needed
      for trimarans and
      whilst these are straightforward to fit into wider-bodied monohulls, the
      trimaran's narrower
      centrehull makes installing these a far more challenging issue, if the
      advantage of increased
      efficiency offered by the slimmer hullforms is not to be compromised [4].
    To initially size a trimaran vessel at the start of preliminary design,
      it is necessary to determine
      practically all the principal form parameters. Once the form parameters
      have been obtained the
      designer can be reasonably confident that the initial default hull
      parameter values will only need
      refining beyond the initial sizing. The degree of that commitment differs
      substantially from monohull
      vessels, where it is possible to delay full parametric selection because
      there is a large historical
      database upon which to draw information. UCL has published a comprehensive
      description of the
      preliminary design of a trimaran vessel i.e. the 5000-tonne Trimaran
      Destroyer, for which the
      DERA Haslar 6m model tests were conducted [2].
    Further work in trimaran research was funded through an Office of Naval
      Research (ONR)
      initiative. The Atlantic Center for the Innovative Design and Control
        of Ships (ACCeSS) was
      founded in 2002 to establish an academic environment where engineering
      disciplines associated
      with novel hull design and ship automation could be brought together
      within the context of the total
      ship system architecture. The academic partners in ACCeSS (http://www.stevens.edu/access)
      are
      many USA universities, UCL (the only UK partner) and industry.
      Importantly, the partners include
      the Davidson (High Speed Tow Tank) Laboratory and US Naval Academy (Large
      Tow Tank),
      Annapolis. The consortium worked with NSWC Carderock on the design,
      testing and technology
      development for trimaran hullforms. As part of ACCeSS research activities
      further research was
      undertaken on two trimaran models &#8212; one large and one small. Specific
      areas of research
      addressed were parametric resonance (the interaction of waves with
      hullform) and side-hull
      positioning i.e. the relative location of the smaller sidehulls to the
      centre hullform. The findings
      were passed into ONR to support US naval interest in trimarans, which was
      gathering pace with
      the building of the littoral combat ship. Collaborative research was
      carried out in several areas, with
      UCL primarily involved with trimaran resistance characterisation obtained
      through experimentation
      in tow tanks, stability analysis including parametric roll and the
      development of design tools for
      comparative analysis [5] and [6].
    To assist with the work undertaken in the USA, ONR supported sabbaticals
      (Drs Greig and
      Bucknall) at the Davidson Laboratory and through an EPSRC award `Trimaran
      Resistance Studies'
      for Visiting Researcher at UCL (Prof R. Royce, Webb Institute) and later a
      Royal Academy of
      Engineering (RAE) Global Research Award to Dr T.P. McDonald.
    Key researchers
    Professor David Andrews &#8212; Professor of Naval Architecture 1993-98
      (subsequently Professor of
      Engineering Design 2000 to date)
      Professor Richard Bucknall &#8212; Professor of Marine Systems 1995-present
      Professor Douglas Pattison &#8212; Professor of Naval Architecture 1989-93
      Dr Alistair Greig &#8212; Senior Lecturer 1987 &#8212; present
      Dr J W Zhang &#8212; Lecturer (deceased), 1996-2004
      Dr T.P. McDonald &#8212; Post-doctoral Researcher 2010-12
      Dr T Grafton &#8212; Research Assistant 2003-2007
    