CaseStudyId: 29983
Title: 
    Treating waste with carbon dioxide: growth of spinout Carbon8 Systems
    

ImpactDetails

    Carbon8 Systems' (C8S) technology, Accelerated Carbonation, uses carbon
      dioxide gas to treat waste materials and form artificial aggregate. Within
      two years of its foundation in 2006, C8S had won several prestigious
      awards, culminating in its announcement as the national winner of the
        2008 Shell Springboard competition [a]. Prize money from the latter
      was used to design and build a pilot-scale plant at a former landfill
      facility owned by Kent County Council. The closed site was suffering from
      degradation and associated subsidence and had limited loss in integrity of
      its clay-capping layer. The pilot plant combusted the landfill gas (mostly
      methane), normally collected and sent to a flare, to produce a CO2-enriched
      gas stream that was then used to carbonate a variety of wastes, including
      biomass ash and ash from paper recycling, to manufacture engineering fill
      to assist in the restoration of the landfill site. Up to 20% carbon
      dioxide by weight can be captured in these wastes. Trials of the plant
      over a 6-month period successfully demonstrated that an integrated waste
      collection and treatment facility could be operated, supplied by the
      site's own waste gas. [b] The success of this project was such that C8S
      was invited, together with other low-carbon innovation companies, to No.10
      Downing Street four days before the start of critical global climate
      change negotiations in Copenhagen in 2009. At the time, Prime Minister
      Gordon Brown said: "Our transition to a low carbon economy will be a key
      driver of our future economic prosperity. Carbon8 Systems...are at the
      forefront of this transformation. Their innovation and expertise
      demonstrates why the UK is one of best places in the world for low carbon
      business." [c] Carbonation is now recognised as a potential option for CO2
      sequestration by the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change (IPCC), the
      world's foremost body advising on climate change science.
    In 2009/10 the results of the TSB project were used to optimise the
      landfill gas pilot plant, which was then showcased in collaboration with
      Kent County Council and the Environment Agency in September 2010 to a
      group of invited industrialists, including waste management problem
      holders and waste management solution providers, such as Aylesford Paper,
      Shell and SITA [d]. This has led to exploratory studies by C8S on other
      waste forms, such as oil-drill cuttings, and on-going negotiations with
      waste-to-energy and waste management companies, all of which are at a
      commercially sensitive stage and cannot be detailed here. However, it is
      clear that, due to government and EU regulations on the management and
      disposal of wastes, there is a great deal of interest in C8S's technology
      as a means of mitigating costs and adding value to waste streams.
    The success of the landfill gas project allowed C8S to leverage an
      initial equity investment of &#163;120,000 from high-net-worth individuals, and
      a second company, Carbon8 Aggregates (C8A), was formed in early 2010
      to focus on the commercial opportunities arising from the production of
      aggregates from such wastes. This company went on to build a larger-scale
      plant at Grundon Waste Management's site in Brandon, Suffolk and
      successfully produced &#8212; to the manufacturer's specifications &#8212; 500 tonnes
      of aggregate from MSWI APCrs for use as raw material by Lignacite, a major
      UK block manufacturer. This led, in turn, to investment in C8A in 2012
        by Grundon Waste Management, with the sole purpose of commercialising
        ACT for the treatment of MSWI APCrs [e] This second-round
      investment, which consisted of cash, in-kind support and a bank guarantee,
      allowed the construction of the first full-scale commercial plant, which
      was built at the Lignacite block plant in Suffolk in January 2012. The
      plant, which employs shift teams of three plus the site manager, was
      designed to process 18,000 tonnes per year, providing Lignacite with
      36,000 tonnes of aggregate: processing capacity has since gradually risen
      to nearly 400 tonnes per month. C8A is currently writing a specification
      for plants two and three, which are likely to be built within the next six
      to nine months. The success of the trials and the quality of the product
      convinced Lignacite to invest into 50% of Carbon8 Aggregates [f].
    The Environment Agency Modernising Waste Panel confirmed in 2012 that the
      output from the process meets its End of Waste criteria, which specify
      when a certain waste ceases to be waste and obtains a status of a product
      (or a secondary raw material). All companies dealing with waste management
      are governed under these criteria. For Carbon8 Aggregates, it means that
      the treated APCRs can be used as an aggregate product, for example in
      block making. Facilities using this technology are now being developed
      across the UK, generating a secondary, recycled aggregate &#8212; which is
      carbon negative &#8212; to replace land- and sea-won materials. Using the
      carbonated, recycled material allows manufacturers to avoid the tax of
        &#163;2.00 per tonne levied by the UK government on these natural aggregates
      whilst making a meaningful contribution to the country's effective and
        environmentally sound disposal of CO2 waste:
      blocks produced from the fly ash of waste incinerators encapsulate 14kg of
      carbon dioxide per tonne.
    In May 2013, Lignacite launched its "Carbon Buster" block, made up of
        more than 50% recycled material, including the C8A pellets [g]. In
      the UK Carbon Buster customers, mainly construction companies, gain
      credits under the environment assessment schemes of BRE Environmental
      Assessment Method (BREEAM) and the Code for Sustainable Homes for using
      Carbon Buster blocks, which enables them to construct homes with
      attractive sustainability ratings. In July 2013 the product won the
        Best Recycled Product award at the 2013 National Recycling Awards
      held at the London Hilton in Park Lane [h]. C8S has begun discussions with
      a number of companies in Australia to market ACT in Australasia, where a
      patent applies. The total number of employees of both C8S and C8A
        currently stands at 11 [i]
    In addition to the environmental compliance benefits outlined above,
      their launch of the world's first ever carbon-negative building block
      brought Lignacite &#8212; as well as C8S and C8A &#8212; positive media coverage from
      around the world [j]. The C8S and C8A teams' contributions to media
        discourse about this development not only helped to enhance their
      own and their commercial partners' standing, but also enhanced
        awareness of and engagement with important environmental issues relating
        to the research among an international public audience.
    The research on APCr has, moreover, had further non-academic impacts
        on UK policy, leading to the incorporation in 2011 of a
        recycling option into Defra's guidance on the management of APCr, in
      relation to the requirement for UK companies to reduce their waste streams
      as much as possible to meet the EU's Waste Framework Directive [k]. This
      change has moved APCr up the waste hierarchy, which sets out the various
      stages to waste minimisation, from recovery of value from wastes to the
      prevention of the formation of waste in the first place. Recycling is
      halfway up the hierarchy. Also in 2012, the Environment Agency removed the
      Waste Acceptance Criteria derogation allowing APCr to go to landfill from
      around 2015, since they believe that there are now viable alternatives due
      to the research and development carried out by Simons and C8S. C8S can
        provide Energy from Waste (EfW) plants with a true zero waste to
        landfill option, which helps with planning applications. The EfW
      industry in the UK is currently worth around 6 billion GBP, which is
      expected to rise to 30 billion GBP in the next 10 years. Hence, C8A has
      provided a number of letters of support for companies making new planning
      applications for EfWs.
    
ImpactSummary

    Carbon8 Systems (C8S) was founded on joint research between UCL and the
      University of Greenwich. The company has since developed a technology
      known as Accelerated Carbonation, which helps to reduce carbon dioxide (CO2)
      emissions by using carbon dioxide gas to treat waste materials and form
      artificial aggregate. In January 2013, C8S completed the first commercial
      plant for treating municipal solid waste incinerator (MSWI) fly ashes,
      designed to produce 1,000 tonnes per day of aggregate. Masonry products
      company Lignacite has also benefited commercially. It has used C8S's
      aggregate to develop an award-winning building block that captures more
      carbon dioxide than is emitted during its manufacture. Carbon8 Systems and
      its offshoot company Carbon8 Aggregates currently employ 11 people.
    
UnderpinningResearch

    Accelerated Carbonation Technology (ACT) was originally developed by Dr
      Colin Hills of the University of Greenwich as a land remediation process
      to encapsulate toxic metals as carbonates within cement matrices. It was
      designed to use "bottled" CO2, provided in cylinders in mobile
      units at land remediation sites. Professor Simons (UCL 1993-present,
      Professor of Chemical Engineering since 2002), who has expertise in solids
      handling and particle technology and who founded the Centre for CO2
      Technology in 1998, was approached by Dr Hills in 2002 and asked to help
      develop the process design for large-scale operation using flue-gas CO2.
      Hills and Simons quickly realised the potential to sequester large
      quantities of CO2 emitted from waste-producing industrial
      processes via the treatment of the waste using the said emissions.
      Together with Dr Paula Carey of the Centre for Contaminated Land
      Remediation at the University of Greenwich, they identified waste streams
      within the UK that potentially had the right chemical characteristics for
      treatment by this process. One major source of such waste was the
      increasing use of incineration to convert municipal solid waste (MSW) into
      energy, which process leaves behind a hazardous waste residue in the form
      of fly ash, or Air Pollution Control Residue (APCr). The resulting
      collaboration led to a major research grant under the Biffaward scheme for
      the use of ACT in treating municipal solid waste incinerator (MSWI) APCr
      [7]. Together with funding from an industrial consortium of waste
      management and construction aggregate companies, the work at UCL focused
      on determining the reaction mechanisms involved and the factors governing
      the reaction kinetics, never before determined and crucial for the design
      of any processing plant. Factors such as CO2 concentration,
      water-to-solids ratio, reaction temperature (at atmospheric pressure),
      particle size distribution and reaction rate were optimised to provide the
      greatest extent of conversion of cementitious material to the carbonate
      form [1, 2]. The use of fluidisation as the reactor process was also
      investigated, although the fine ash particles rendered the system too
      cohesive [3, 4]. The University of Greenwich focused on the properties of
      the resulting treated material, in relation to its stability for the
      purposes of either disposal as a now non-hazardous material in landfill
      sites, or reuse as a construction aggregate [5].
    MSWI APCrs were selected as focus for this research since they represent
      a growing disposal problem in the UK and Europe, where the amount of MSW
      diverted from landfill and sent to incinerators continues to grow
      exponentially. The research at UCL and University of Greenwich established
      ACT as an effective treatment method for APCrs, rendering the ashes
      non-hazardous and stable over long time periods. However, up until 2002,
      it was believed that high concentrations (i.e. 100%) of CO2
      were required to drive the carbonation reactions to a rapid conclusion;
      that is, to conclusion in under 15 minutes, rather than the days and
      months required for naturally occurring carbonation reactions slowed by
      the low concentration of CO2 in the atmosphere. Simons' work at
      UCL revealed that this was not, in fact, the case, and that the optimum
      conditions for rapid &#8212; but almost complete &#8212; reaction depended not only on
      the concentration of the gas, but on the particle size of the waste being
      treated, as well as the water-to-solid ratio. As such, the optimum gas
      concentration was shown to be ~30%, more aligned to the concentrations
      found in typical coal-fired power station flues [6]. This crucial
      discovery provided the basis for the design of a continuous process using
      flue gas streams (further developed using prize money (see below) and
      funding from the TSB [8]) and subsequent establishment of Carbon8 Systems.
      Founded in 2006 by Simons, Hills and Carey, Carbon8 Systems was set up to
      commercialise ACT as a waste treatment and CO2 capture process.
      Simons is currently a non-executive director of the company.
    