CaseStudyId: 29984
Title: 
    Improved seismic hazard mapping by institutions in Italy and Greece
    

ImpactDetails

    Over 90 million people were affected by earthquakes between 2000 and
      2012, with more than 800,000 losing their lives. Prior to the research
      described in section 2, seismic hazard worldwide was usually mapped solely
      using the locations and frequencies of instrumentally recorded
      earthquakes, mostly without knowledge of active fault locations. The
      improved methodology developed by Roberts and collaborators, which uses
      the five parameters listed in section 2, has been used in 2008-2013 for
      seismic hazard assessments within institutions in both Greece and Italy,
      the most seismically active parts of Europe. It has impacted on their
      working practices and is resulting in more informed calculations of
      seismic hazard in the two countries.
    Change in the Bank of Greece's seismic hazard assessment: The
      Birkbeck research led in 2013 to a change in the way that the Bank of
      Greece approaches seismic hazard assessment and calculation of
      probabilistic seismic risk, following discussions between the bank,
      Roberts and a Senior Lecturer from the Agricultural University of Athens
      (who was Roberts' co-author on underpinning research reference [3]). As of
      July 2013, the Bank of Greece was running a project to facilitate the use
      of the five parameters listed in section 2 together with the new
      seismic-hazard mapping methodology that was developed by Roberts. This new
      method is being implemented for an upcoming new European Union (EU)
      Directive, known as Solvency II, which codifies and harmonises EU
      insurance regulations in order to enhance consumer protection. The new
      directive requires a credible scientific background that offers a
      probabilistic estimate, something which is found in Roberts' method.
      Another co-author on the underpinning research has been employed by the
      Department of Private Insurance Supervision in the Bank of Greece to
      implement the method and discuss the work with Greek insurance companies.
      The Agricultural University of Athens Senior Lecturer, who is involved in
      the project, writes: "The work of Prof. Gerald Roberts has changed the way
      that the Bank of Greece works in terms of seismic hazard" [A]. In
      addition, as a result of the work with the Bank of Greece on earthquake
      insurance risk, the Senior Lecturer has now been elected as a member of
      the EIOPA (European Insurance and Occupational Pensions Authority)
      Insurance and Reinsurance Stakeholder Group for a more than 2.5-year
      mandate as an advisor on earthquake hazard.
    Adoption of new tools and methods at the Italian Institute for the
        Protection and Research of the Environment: The role of the Natural
      Hazards Unit of the Istituto Superiore per la Protezione e la Ricerca
      Ambientale (ISPRA) is to map, catalogue and risk assess all faults capable
      of earthquakes for the Italian Civil Protection, which then uses this
      information to formulate government policy on earthquake risk (e.g. civil
      defence, infrastructure planning and building regulations). The Head of
      the Natural Hazards Unit reports that the Birkbeck research has "produced
      changes to working practices at my institution in terms of new tools and
      models available to manage seismic hazard and risk, which directly impact
      on the information we provide to the Italian authorities" [B]. Since 2008,
      the unit's adoption of methods laid out in the research has changed how it
      advises the Italian Civil Protection on earthquake hazards and the
      approaches it uses to collect data and work in the field. The Head of the
      unit reports: "we now use fault slip-rates, elapsed times since the last
      earthquake and variability in recurrence intervals in our seismic hazard
      calculations" and "strain-rates from 15 kyrs [ka] are used to compare
      against strain-rates from GPS and historical seismicity to gain insights
      into temporal development of seismicity and hazard" [B]. Insights from the
      Birkbeck work are used to "guide our approach to research and in our
      seismic hazard assessments, in that (a) our staff now subtract
      post-seismic slip from calculations of maximum magnitude from
      palaeoseismic earthquakes, and (b) use shallow geophysics to help assess
      fault slip-rates" [B]. These impacts were enabled through research
      collaborations between Birkbeck and ISPRA. The research is also having an
      impact on public understanding, with the Head of the Natural Hazards Unit
      reporting that he has used the research insights to "improve communication
      with the public about earthquake risks through a series of publicly
      available videos" [B].
    Adoption of new techniques at the Italian Istituto Nazionale di
        Geofisica e Vulcanologia (INGV): The INGV is an Italian civil
      service institution that helps to guide government policy on seismic
      hazards. It conducts 24-hour countrywide seismic surveillance, and early
      warning and forecast activities. Since 2009, the Birkbeck research has
      impacted upon working practices at the INGV. For example, an Earthquake
      Scientist at the INGV, who works on improving seismic hazard mapping
      methodology, reports: "For the last 4 years, my work has been influenced
      by that of Professor Gerald Roberts. His work has had an impact on mine,
      changing the way I have been working, because he has convinced myself and
      others that faults need to be included in seismic hazard assessments so
      that we can use their slip-rates, earthquake recurrence intervals,
      variability in recurrence intervals and elapsed time since the last
      earthquake to calculate and map earthquake probabilities. Before his work,
      these parameters were not used" [C]. A Senior Researcher at the INGV also
      reports that the Birkbeck research is "having [an impact] on my work and
      in my institution" [D]. These impacts on the INGV took place following
      research collaborations between the institution and Birkbeck.
    The ultimate benefit of the research to the Greek and Italian
      organisations above is that they have greater understanding and decreased
      uncertainty concerning the locations, numbers and behaviour of active
      faults that are the sources of devastating earthquakes.
    Improved understanding of seismic hazard within industry and the
        financial sector: Birkbeck research findings are also being
      communicated, through the new PURE (Probability, Uncertainty and Risk in
      the Environment) Knowledge Exchange Network and Research Programme, funded
      by NERC, to industrial partners including Narec Capital Ltd., Hiscox Ltd.,
      Aon Benfield, EuroTempest, Arup Group, Lighthill Risk Network, and Met
      Office. PURE, which is being coordinated through UCL's Institute of Risk
      and Disaster Reduction, will help the UK Government prepare for natural
      hazards and disaster situations, and will help insurance industries meet
      the requirements and risk management standards of the new Solvency II EU
      Directive. In particular, through the PURE network blog, websites and
      meetings, Roberts is involved in communicating to industrial partners the
      hazards associated with devastating earthquakes, elapsed time science, and
      the effects of stress transfer between faults, improving their
      understanding and knowledge of these issues [E].
    
ImpactSummary

    Birkbeck research on improved mapping of seismic hazards has led to
      changes in working practices at Italian civil service institutions and the
      Bank of Greece. In particular, the research has enabled these institutions
      to make more informed assessments of seismic hazard through the use of
      five parameters that were not previously considered. Communication of
      research findings through meetings and websites as part of a new Knowledge
      Exchange Network has also resulted in improved understanding about
      earthquake hazard within industry and the financial sector in the UK.
    
UnderpinningResearch

    Assessments of earthquake hazard worldwide are mostly underpinned by only
      around 40 years of instrumental seismicity data. This is a problem, since
      earthquake recurrence intervals for damaging earthquakes on individual
      active faults are commonly hundreds to thousands of years. Instrumental
      seismicity data cannot capture (a) the location of every active fault in a
      region, (b) the recurrence intervals and natural variability in recurrence
      intervals for damaging earthquakes on each active fault, and (c) the
      elapsed time since the last damaging earthquake on each active fault.
      These variables are essential to calculate the probabilities of damaging
      earthquakes occurring in a stated time period, and hence to produce
      probabilistic seismic hazard maps that quantify the geography of both
      financial and social risk. Furthermore, current methods do not usually
      include site effects where shaking amplifies/attenuates on
      soft-sediment/bedrock sites; instead, simple distance attenuation
      functions for seismic shaking are used.
    To address these problems, research within the Department of Earth and
      Planetary Sciences at Birkbeck involved collaboration with the Italian
      civil service and the Bank of Greece to enable the calculation and mapping
      of seismic hazard based on the following five parameters:
    (1) Maps of active faults &#8212; this parameter identifies all known seismic
      sources.
    (2) Maps of bedrock/sediment that have different site-responses to
      seismic shaking.
    (3) Fault slip-rates and Holocene (15 &#177; 3 ka) earthquake recurrence
      intervals (with post-seismic slip subtracted) &#8212; this parameter defines how
      many earthquake shaking events are expected in a given time period using
      data that are measured over a time period that is known to be long enough
      to average out temporal earthquake clustering.
    (4) Variability in recurrence intervals &#8212; this parameter quantifies the
      variability of recurrence intervals relative to the value averaged over
      the whole Holocene.
    (5) Elapsed time since the last earthquake &#8212; this parameter sets the
      start time for conditional probability calculations for earthquakes on
      specific faults.
    Research between 2008 and 2013 involved (a) field and satellite mapping
      of active faults to identify all potential seismic sources [1-5]; (b)
      measurements of geomorphic offsets across faults (usually the offset of
      the periglacial surface marking the demise of the last glacial maximum 15
      &#177; 3 ka) to gain the slip-rate averaged over multiple seismic cycles [2,
      3]; (c) dating the offset surfaces with 36Cl cosmogenic
      exposure dating to confirm slip-rates; (d) mapping fault kinematics to
      facilitate calculation of a strain-rate field that quantifies the
      geography of 15 ka-averaged stress-loading [2]; (e) dating exposed fault
      surfaces with 36Cl to gain past slip-magnitudes and hence
      earthquake magnitudes needed to calculate earthquake recurrence intervals;
      (f) measuring the 36Cl concentration on the immediate top 2 metres of the
      sub-surface fault plane to gain the residence time in that location and
      hence the elapsed time since the last surface-faulting (i.e. damaging)
      earthquake; (g) measuring the surface rupture and afterslip
      characteristics of a recent earthquake (L'Aquila 2009, Mw 6.3)
      to calibrate the slip-rate to recurrence interval calculation for older
      slip [5, 6]; (h) compiling the historical and palaeoseismic database to
      identify the longest and most geographically complete earthquake record
      possible [2]; (i) using the earthquake record to calculate Coulomb stress
      transfer between faults; (j) combining the strain-rate field (loading rate
      on individual faults), stress transfer results, and elapsed time results
      to map stress concentration relative to elapsed time across the region;
      (k) back calculating the stress and elapsed time for all known past
      earthquakes to test the hypothesis that damaging earthquakes occur
      preferentially in locations with anomalously long elapsed times and high
      stress concentrations; and (l) using the results of (k) to produce seismic
      hazard maps with civil service project partners.
    The key Birkbeck researcher was Gerald Roberts (Senior Lecturer and
      Reader 2008-2012; Professor 2012-present).
    