CaseStudyId: 30001
Title: 
    Children's physical activity: stimulating policy debate and health
        improvements
    

ImpactDetails

    The research outlined above has had multifarious impacts: it has
      influenced central and local government policies relating to play and
      school transport; contributed to public discourse about, and engagement
      with, the same issues; and improved health, welfare and quality of life in
      many UK communities through, for example, their greater use of walking
      buses.
    Stakeholder engagement: Mackett has communicated his research
      findings to government and community stakeholders through more than 25
      invited presentations since 2008. These have included conferences and
      seminars for professionals involved in children's travel and play,
      including the Play Research Network (1 Feb 2008), Play Scotland (19 Nov
      2008), the Health and Consumers Directorate General of the EU (11 Feb
      2011), the West Midlands Region School Travel Advisors (3 March 2011), and
      at invited seminars in Romania (10 November 2008) the USA (20 Feb 2009)
      and New Zealand (5 Nov 2012).
    Informing policy advocacy: The Sustainable Development
      Commission, formerly the UK government's independent adviser on
      sustainable development, cited Mackett's research on calories burned by
      children undertaking various activities and using various modes of travel
      in its 2011 report `Fairness in a Car-dependent Society', quoting various
      results as part of the discussion about obesity [a, pages 29, 67].
      Advocacy groups such as Sustrans and Living Streets, and local groups,
      frequently cite Mackett's research as evidence for action to be undertaken
      to increase children's physical activity. For example, Sustrans quoted
      Mackett in an October 2011 submission on road safety to the parliamentary
      Transport Select Committee [b], while Living Streets cited his work in an
      expert paper included in NICE public health guidance on promoting walking
      and cycling, issued in November 2012 [c]. `State of Play', published by
      the Association of Play Industries for use by advocates of children's play
      and the play equipment industry, quotes Mackett in outlining the benefits
      of play for children's health and in claiming that children tend to walk
      when they go out to play. They use this evidence to argue for safer
        streets and places for play [d, page 11]. Play England, a charity
      supported by government departments and industry, which seeks to promote
      the vision in the UN Convention on the Rights of the Child, used Mackett's
      research to argue for the health benefits of children's play, and
      Play Wales used the research to provide evidence for public health
        specialists, primary care teams and healthy school co-ordinators about
        the benefits of children's play [e, pages 4-5; f, page 2].
    Influence on policy documents and guidelines: In 2008, the
      National Institute for Health and Clinical Excellence (NICE) produced
      `Guidance on physical activity, play and sport for pre-school and school
      age children' for health and transport policy makers and practitioners,
      which includes a cost-effectiveness analysis of four interventions to
      increase child and adolescent physical activity. One of the interventions
      considered was walking buses to school: evidence from Mackett's
        research was used by the NICE team to demonstrate that this was the most
        cost-effective intervention [g, pages 5-12, 27-29]. Additionally,
      the research on the benefits of play has been widely taken up by
        central and local government. It was cited in the document `Fair
      Play: A Consultation on the Play Strategy, A Commitment from the
      Children's Plan' issued by the Department for Children, Schools and
      Families and the Department of Culture, Media and Sport [h], which says:
      "Active play is also one of the best ways for children to burn calories
      outside of PE lessons." [h, page 10]. This consultation was used to
        develop the National Play Strategy, published in December 2008 and
      which set out the government's 10-year vision to deliver more and better
      play opportunities for children in England.
    Implementation by local authorities: Conwy Active for Life,
      published by Conwy County Borough Council (2011) "to strategically
      prioritise effective delivery mechanisms to ensure that Conwy is a county
      where physical activity is at the heart of the community", cites Mackett's
      research about the benefits of various types of play for children [i, page
      12]. Figures from the Reducing Children's Car Use study published in 2004
      are used to calculate of the number of calories consumed walking and
        cycling to school in the School Travel Health Check (STHC) tool
      which is used by local authorities and schools to set priorities,
        outcomes and milestones to improve active and sustainable travel to
      school [j]. In 2011, the STHC was used by 29 local authorities, 4,626
      schools, and over 1.5 million pupils, for example in Plymouth, Bristol and
      Cornwall [k]. The STHC was also used in the 2012 South East Dorset
      Multi-Modal Transport Study [k], which led to the adoption of School
      Travel Plans in Bournemouth to encourage more walking and cycling to
      school and has been used by Dorset County Council to set targets for
      walking and cycling. This strategy to increase working and cycling by
      children will require a budget of &#163;2.042m over 15 years [k].
    Informing media coverage: This has helped to further inform
        public understanding of the importance of children's activity. Since
      2008, this has included an article on the effects of parental choice of
      school on children's physical activity levels, in the Daily Telegraph; the
      risk of children whose parents drive them a lot becoming car-dependent
      adults, in the New York Times; and a BBC Breakfast television feature on
      children's independent movement on urban areas. [l]
    Improving children's health through the institution of walking
          buses to school: Since the publication of the 2008 NICE
      guidance on physical activity, play and sport for children (which drew on
      Mackett's research, as noted above), walking buses have been set up
        around the country. 130 now exist in Staffordshire, for example; a
      further 60 have been set up in Kent and 30 in West Sussex [m]. The
      benefits of these buses extend, moreover, beyond positive impacts on
      children's health and well-being to environmental benefits arising
        from reductions in the number of car journeys made to school: in
      Thurrock, Essex, for instance, estimates show walking buses have saved
        an average of 2160g of CO2 per mile [n].
    Preventing school closures: Campaigners used the research
      on children's travel to school to help make the case to keep Bearsden
      Primary School at Bearsden Cross, in East Dunbartonshire, Scotland, rather
      then move to Castlehill where, it was claimed, more children would need to
      travel by car [o]. Campaigners said that closure would damage educational
      outcomes, represent poor value for the council taxpayer and harm the
      commercial and community heart of Bearsden. The school was subsequently
      saved [o].
    
ImpactSummary

    Research led by Professor Roger Mackett of the Department of Civil,
      Environmental and Geomatic Engineering at UCL on children's physical
      activity has been used by central and local government, other public
      bodies and various advocacy groups to encourage children to be more
      active. It has been used to support policy documents and proposals aimed
      at improving children's health and wellbeing. It has led to improvements
      in the health, welfare and quality of life of many UK communities through,
      for example, their greater use of walking buses, which also contributes to
      reduced CO2 emissions.
    
UnderpinningResearch

    Research into children's physical activity, looking particularly at the
      benefits of walking to school and the contribution of play, was carried
      out in two EPSRC-funded projects led between 2001 and 2006 by Roger
      Mackett (Professor of Transport Studies at UCL since 1997). The projects,
      on which Mackett was Principal Investigator, also involved researchers
      from the Universities of Exeter and Oxford, Hertfordshire County Council,
      and Herts Health Promotion as Co-investigators. All the research was
      carried out at UCL under Mackett's supervision.
    The first of these projects, `Reducing Children's Car Use', ran between
      2001 and 2003. It addressed the issue identified in Mackett's earlier work
      for the Department for Transport (1998-2000) that many short car trips in
      Britain result from meeting the needs of children. Making large numbers of
      trips by car has possible serious implications for children's health
      because of the lack of physical activity, and may contribute to car
      dependency in later life. The UCL-based research took the innovative step
      of fitting accelerometers to 200 children for four days and requiring them
      to complete travel and activity diaries. Mackett's group devised a
      taxonomy scheme for the children's activities, allowing the number of
      calories consumed per minute on each activity to be calculated. The
      research showed that not only did children use more calories when walking
      than they did in the car, but that the older children aged 12-13 used more
      calories walking to and from school in a week than they did in two hours
      of PE and games lessons (the recommended standard levels of physical
      activity for children) [6]. It was also shown that children use more
      calories in free play than in equivalent organised activities, and that
      they tend to walk when they go out to play, but are taken by car to
      organised activities. This research provided useful evidence to explain
      the increase in obesity amongst children. A specific intervention that was
      examined as part of this project was walking buses, in which groups of
      children walk to school under adult supervision. The research found that
      nearly half the trips made on walking buses were previously made by car,
      and that children transferring from a car to using a walking bus were
      involved in an extra 22 minutes of physical activity per day [7].
    The second project, titled `Children's activities, perceptions and
      behaviour in the local environment' (CAPABLE), ran between 2004 and 2006,
      and sought to monitor and explore children's interactions with the local
      environment. In order to achieve this, the research team added GPS
      monitors, as well as various qualitative indicators such as children's
      drawings and interviews with parents, to the tools used previously
      (diaries and accelerometers) to understand both the quantity and the
      quality of children's activity by identifying differences in their
      behaviour in different environments and under different circumstances.
      Boys, for example, were found to move about more than girls [1,5]. It was
      also shown that children moved in much straighter lines when they were
      accompanied by an adult than they did when they were with other children,
      suggesting that greater adult supervision of children outside the home may
      be reducing children's exploratory behaviour and interaction with local
      environments [5].
    The data sets collected on the two projects were combined and analysed in
      2012 to show the hypothetical benefits to children of a switch to
      year-round British Summer Time. These benefits accrue particularly from
      the findings of the research that children tend to be more active when
      evenings are light [4], and that children who walk to school are more
      active at other times [3]. Mackett has been able to incorporate a strong
      international-comparative perspective on the earlier research through his
      contribution between 2007 and 2009 to a project funded by the Norwegian
      Research Council comparing children's car use and physical activity in
      Britain, Denmark, Finland and Norway [2]. Mackett provided the data for
      Britain and participated in the discussions leading to the conclusions
      that children in Britain use active travel less than in the other
      countries. In 2009 Mackett joined a project led by the Policy Studies
      Institute to examine how children's independent mobility has changed over
      the past 40 years and how it varies around the world. The results are
      currently being published. They show that children's independent mobility
      has continued to decrease in England over the period 1990-2010, but at a
      slower rate than in the period 1971-1990 and that children have less
      freedom to go out without adult supervision than in most other countries.
    