CaseStudyId: 30005
Title: 
    Application of magnetic nanoparticles in the treatment of breast
        cancer
    

ImpactDetails

    More than 1.38 million new cases of breast cancer are diagnosed around
      the world each year, a figure that is currently increasing by 20,000 year
      on year. In almost all cases, surgery is required to remove the tumour. To
      determine whether the disease has spread to other sites, the European
      Organisation for Research and Treatment of Cancer currently recommends
      sentinel lymph node biopsy (SLNB), wherein the sentinel lymph nodes are
      removed and inspected under a microscope. This minimally invasive
      procedure is the preferred standard of care in breast cancer operations;
      in the UK, around 80% of all operations for that cancer include SLNB.
    Despite this, current methods of sentinel node detection are not easy to
      use, involving the injection of radioactive isotopes, along with a blue
      dye as a tracer. A surgeon then uses a hand-held Geiger counter to locate
      the node or nodes closest to the tumour. Because the isotopes are
      potentially hazardous they must be injected in the nuclear medicine
      department, rather than by surgeons. The injection itself is painful and
      distressing, and the isotopes' six-hour half-life presents challenges and
      limitations for theatre scheduling. Mandatory handling and waste disposal
      regulations add to the overheads for this procedure, as does the training
      and licensing of operating theatre staff in the handling of these
      radioactive materials. Furthermore, patients themselves may have
      reservations about the use of nuclear medicine. Together, these factors
      present a significant barrier to the widespread adoption of SLNB. For
      hospitals or clinics without ready access to radioisotopes, SLNB is not
      performed at all. As a result, 40% of all breast cancer procedures
      performed in the West and almost 85% of operations in the rest of the
      world simply do not include SLNB.
    The research described above has had direct and significant impacts on
      this particular healthcare problem through the commercial production of
      the award-winning SentiMag device and the Sienna+ tracer [a], which have
      been used to treat more than 850 breast cancer patients since 2008.
      Together, these new technologies make SLNB available to more patients and
      at a lower cost than the limited availability radioisotope-based method.
      The magnetic approach to SLNB is straightforward, and minimal clinician
      training is required for its administration. Sienna+, a fluid containing a
      solution of coated iron oxide particles, each around 60 nanometres in
      diameter, is injected near the tumour to provide a trackable signal, as
      lymph capillaries easily absorb particles of this size. Surgeons then use
      the SentiMag to locate the lymph node or nodes closest to the tumour in
      order to determine whether or how far the cancer has spread. In contrast
      to the radioactive tracer, the Sienna+ device has a shelf life of several
      years, enabling its use much more widely than just at centres with access
      to nuclear medicine. The new technology poses no staff safety issues, and
      therefore no regulatory burden.
    [text removed for publication]
    These benefits derived principally from the success of the clinical work
      in 2006-07, which led to the decision to take the SentiMag all the way
      `from bench to clinic'. With seed investment from UCL Business plc, the
      Bloomsbury Bioseed Fund and the Central London Universities Challenge
      Fund, Endomagnetics Ltd. was formed as a spin-out company in April 2007.
      After the initial patent filing in 2006, a portfolio of five further
      patents was generated, currently at different stages of prosecution in
      Europe, the USA, Canada, Japan and Australia. Between 2008 and 2010, the
      Technology Strategy Board supported a collaborative research project
      linking Endomagnetics with Integrated Technologies Ltd, a medical devices
      manufacturer; this resulted in a prototype SentiMag trialled on 50
      subjects [outputs 6, 7, above]. The pilot model differed from the original
      prototype in its incorporation of the new room temperature sensor and an
      optimised control circuit designed by Hattersley. With a fully validated
      technical file for the hardware, firmware and software components of the
      SentiMag system resulting from the trial, in December 2010 Endomagnetics
      was able to secure CE marking for the SentiMag as a Class IIa medical
      device, as required for its use throughout Europe [e].
    Growth followed in August 2011 with the completion of an additional round
      of private investment, and the appointment of three full-time company
      employees &#8212; a CEO, and technical and operational staff. In November 2011 a
      second CE mark was issued to the company for the production of its own
      tracer, Sienna+, for on-label use as an interstitial injectable marker for
      lymph node detection [f]. The two products were launched in the European
      market in 2012, and in February 2013 a distribution agreement was signed
      between Endomagnetics Ltd and Sysmex Europe GmbH to supply the products
      into the Europe, Middle East and Asia region [g].
    Endomagnetics Ltd is currently working with the FDA and with American
      regulatory consultants to establish its entry into the United States
      market. Here, despite the extremely high quality of major city-based
      cancer centres, the more rural, outlying hospitals are almost entirely cut
      off from a source of radioisotopes, so for them, there is a definite
      clinical need to be addressed.
    Clinical trials: The technology has been tested with patients in a
      number of clinical trials [h]. The cryogen-free SentiMag was first tested
      in clinical studies on 43 patients in 2009-10 by Mr Douek (who by then had
      moved to Guy's Hospital London), using Endorem. This was designed to
      assess safety and to be a prima facie measurement of efficacy. The
      study found no adverse reactions, and the observed detection rate was
      high: 87% in patients that were injected less than an hour before the
      operation, and 93% for those that were operated on after an hour or more
      [output 7]. This difference was taken as an indication that the 150 nm
      diameter of the Endorem particles was inhibiting their lymphatic flow, and
      led to the development of the 60 nm Sienna+ particles [output 7]. An added
      benefit was also noted: that the presence of magnetic particles in the
      excised nodes gave them a brown/black colouration that aided
      intraoperative identification [i].
    In 2012-13 Mr Douek led a 160-patient clinical evaluation that involved
      six UK hospitals and one Dutch hospital. This was designed to be a
      statistically significant comparative study of the radioisotope and
      magnetic methods. The result was conclusive: a Sienna+ identification rate
      of 94% was recorded, compared to 95% with the radioisotopes, so that at
      the statistical power of 80% it was concluded that the magnetic technique
      was non-inferior to the radioactive technique [j].
    
ImpactSummary

    Groundbreaking UCL research and development of magnetic nanoparticles for
      biomedical applications led to the introduction in 2012 of the world's
      first licensed nanoparticulate injectable medical device, the Sienna+
      tracer, and its associated detection system, the SentiMag. A UCL spinout
      company, Endomagnetics Ltd., has introduced this new technology to better
      diagnose and treat cancer without the need for invasive surgery. The
      system uses magnetic materials, rather than radioisotopes, to locate the
      sentinel lymph nodes that are the key indicators of the spread of cancer
      away from the primary tumour site. As well as improving patient outcomes,
      the system considerably improves hospital workflow and efficiency since,
      unlike radioisotopes, the injectable magnetic tracer (Sienna+) is readily
      available and requires no special handling
    
UnderpinningResearch

    In 2003/4 Quentin Pankhurst (joined UCL 1993, now Director of the
      Institute of Biomedical Engineering) started work with the UCL Healthcare
      Biomagnetics Laboratory (HBL) on biomagnetic alternatives to the use of
      radioisotopes in sentinel lymph node biopsy (SLNB), currently the
      recommended clinical method for determining the spread of cancers,
      including breast cancer. Pankhurst's interest in magnetic nanoparticles
      had developed towards engineering-based problems, moving from research in
      1994 on the physics of protein-encapsulated magnetic particles [1] through
      to work in 1998 on stabilising factors in biocompatible magnetic fluids
      [2]. By 2001, when he won an MRC Discipline Hoppers grant to study the
      magnetic properties of the Alzheimer brain [3], healthcare biomagnetics
      had become the focus of his research, and he formed the HBL.
    At that time, biomedical engineering approaches to the use of magnetic
      nanoparticles in healthcare were unheard of. The field was focused firmly
      on the intravenous injection of magnetic particles as MRI contrast agents
      or drug delivery vectors. In contrast, the HBL method brought together
      systems engineering, hardware development and materials engineering to
      meet carefully targeted (and achievable) clinical goals. The HBL
      established the paradigm &#8212; now used by research teams all over the world &#8212;
      of `sensing, moving and heating' as a rubric to motivate applications
      based on remote sensing (as with the SLNB project); actuation (as with in
        vivo stem cell targeting); and thermoablation (as with local heating
      treatments of prostate cancer). This new paradigm was expounded in a 2003
      review article by Pankhurst [4], since cited more than 3,000 times.
    Pankhurst and his team have remained at the forefront of the new field of
      biomedical engineering with biomagnetics. In particular, they have
      pioneered the repurposing of clinically validated commercial biomaterials
      (such as the MRI contrast agents Endorem and Resovist) to establish
      proof-of-principle in a given biomedical context, and the adoption of
      system engineering approaches (to activate and monitor them after their
      introduction into the body) for sensing, moving, and heating applications.
      This has allowed early-stage first-in-man studies to be performed with new
      devices and existing biomaterials, and supported the subsequent
      development of bespoke biomaterials; in the case of SLNB, these have
      included the Sienna+ tracer.
    In 2003/04 Pankhurst received funding from the Department of Trade and
      Industry, under the UK-Texas Bioscience Initiative, for a project with the
      Texas Center for Superconductivity at the University of Houston to build a
      prototype SLNB detector. In the collaboration, the Houston team was
      responsible for supplying a novel sensor for the device, and the HBL team
      was responsible for everything else &#8212; ca. 85% of the work. The objective
      was to build a device with a hand-held probe, capable of detecting 100
      micrograms of magnetic tracer at a distance of 20 mm (the equivalent of
      one millionth of the Earth's magnetic field at the probe tip), suitable
      for use in an operating theatre.
    The original design, developed between 2004 and 2007 by Pankhurst and
      Simon Hattersley (UCL Research Fellow, Department of Physics), was based
      on a probe-cable-base-unit design wherein a probe comprising sense and
      drive coils arranged as first-order gradiometers acted as a magnetic
      susceptometer. The cable was flexible and carried both the drive and sense
      signals, in an unbroken loop, to the base-unit. At the heart of the
      base-unit was a superconducting quantum interference device (SQUID)
      sensor, cooled by liquid nitrogen to a temperature of 77 K. This prototype
      design presented a host of major mechanical, electrical, and systems
      engineering challenges: the use of liquid cryogens, the tiny sense
      currents, the substantial drive currents, and major issues related to
      thermal expansion, all within the same system.
    Despite these challenges, by 2006 the HBL team managed to incorporate the
      Houston SQUID into a prototype SentiMag device [5]. A patent was filed
      disclosing the invention and its unique features, namely a transformative
      approach to at-source noise reduction and unprecedented attention to the
      mechanical and thermal stability of the ceramic rod onto which the
      electromagnetic sense and drive coils were wound. Also in 2006, a clinical
      investigator-led, pre-certification human trial began, generating real
      patient data and insight into the treatment pathway. The SentiMag was
      first used clinically in December 2006 by Michael Douek, a breast cancer
      surgeon from the UCL Department of Surgery. The SLNB procedure was
      successfully tested using the SentiMag and the commercial tracer, Endorem.
      By the end of 2007, 12 subjects had been treated with a 100% detection
      rate, equal to that achieved using the standard radioactive method [6].
    Throughout 2007, clinical tests and discussions with Mr Douek illuminated
      a further set of engineering challenges, primarily around safety,
      sterilisability and robustness, to be addressed to bring the SentiMag to
      an acceptable standard for routine hospital use. One of these was the need
      to find a replacement for the liquid-nitrogen-cooled Houston SQUID sensor,
      because of the danger posed by its use of cryogens. This challenge was met
      by systems engineer Hattersley, who developed an entirely electronic
      system able to meet the detector's sensitivity requirements [7].
    In 2010-11, further work began on formulating a bespoke magnetic tracer
      to replace Endorem. The Sienna+ tracer was formulated through a series of
      animal model biocompatibility experiments alongside a comprehensive
      clinical evaluation of previously published data. Sienna+ differed from
      Endorem in that it was smaller, at ca. 60 nm diameter, and was designed
      specifically for interstitial, rather than intravenous, injection [7].
    