CaseStudyId: 30002
Title: 
    Space vehicle surface force modelling for orbit prediction
        (engineering applications) and orbit determination (science programmes)
    

ImpactDetails

    The long-standing relationship between UCL and NASA Jet Propulsion
      Laboratory and NASA Goddard Space Flight Centre founded on the research
      outlined above has been sustained to the present day via invited
      presentations at those institutions; publications in scientific journals
      (including joint publications with NASA scientists, e.g. [6]) and in
      conference presentations. Ziebart has convened conference sessions on
      orbit dynamics at the American Geophysical Union and the European
      Geosciences Union, stimulating further work in the field. As well as
      supporting this important relationship with NASA's research centres, the
      work led to the UCL's participation (2003 onwards) in the NASA Ocean
      Surface Topography Science working team. Ziebart became a board member of
      the International GNSS Service (IGS) in 2011, and provided leadership of
      the IGS working group on satellite orbit dynamics. These relationships
      have provided vital pathways for the impacts of the research described
      above. They have led, in particular, to the use of UCL research to correct
      errors in the orbit prediction and orbit determination of satellites,
      enabling these satellites to provide more precise data for a range of
      applications, including monitoring the effects of climate change, and in
      GPS satellite navigation systems.
    Contributions to the work of the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate
        Change (IPCC):
      Because thermal expansion and ice cover loss (glaciers, ice sheets)
      contribute to rising sea level, ocean monitoring provides one of the best
      ways of modelling long-term climate effects. Sea level monitoring is
      carried out using high-accuracy altimetry satellites that are able to
      record millimetre-level changes, enabling precise calculations of
      temperature changes in the ocean over time. NASA's primary mission for
      measuring sea level change was the Jason-1 satellite, which was
      operational from 2001 to 2013. Every ten days, Jason-1 produced a model of
      the shape of the world's oceans, providing accurate indications of
      long-term changes in sea level. Jason-1 data constituted a critical
      element in the geophysical data records (GDRs, compiled by NASA, and used
      widely by oceanographers to monitor and model ocean dynamics) determining
      changes in the ocean's surface, thus forming one of the most powerful
      pieces of evidence to show that the Earth's climate is changing.
      Throughout Jason-1's lifetime, the GDRs were submitted to the
      Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change (IPCC), the world's principal
      climate science assessment body whose members include representatives of
      195 governments. The solar radiation pressure and thermal re-radiation
      modelling techniques established by Ziebart's team, which were adopted as
      operational standards by NASA in 2010 removed significant systematic
      biases in the satellite orbits, reducing aliasing and anomalies in the sea
      level records passed to the IPCC [6].
    In December 2007, the IPCC released its Fourth Assessment Report on the
      scientific basis, impacts and mitigation of climate change. It included
      details of the recorded change in sea level to that point, based on
      Jason-1 outputs. Between 2008 and 2013, data from Jason-1 continued to be
      passed to the IPCC, feeding into its 2008 Climate Change and Water
      Technical Report [f] and informing the subject matter of its Working Group
      1, which monitors and reports on the physical science bases of climate
      change. Reports from this working group are discussed by policymakers and
      other stakeholders at the UN's annual climate change conferences (UN COP,
      four of which have been held between 2008 and July 2013). The first draft
      of the group's contribution to the IPCC's Fifth Assessment Report,
      including a summary for policymakers, was made available to governments
      for comments in July 2013. A lead author for IPCC Working Group 1 says:
      "This mission [Jason-1] provides one of the fundamental inputs to the
      IPCC... the computation of orbits is an integral step in the chain of
      producing meaningful data. This data is being used by sea level scientists
      to improve projections of future sea level rise."
    In turn, the IPCC's data "then affects directly the formulation of policy
      seeking to mitigate the negative impacts of climate change upon the entire
      population of the Earth." One direct application he points to is the use
      of the data to determine planning for coastal infrastructure. [d]
    GPS satellites: The development of Ziebart's techniques and their
      subsequent testing (in particular the demonstration of the effectiveness
      of earth radiation pressure and antenna thrust modelling) changed the way
      in which the orbits of all GPS satellites are calculated &#8212; specifically
      considering the directions and characteristics of forces previously not
      considered. Those satellites have applications in monitoring the
      earthquake cycle, measuring plate tectonics, precision agriculture as well
      as for routine navigation applications in electronic devices such as
      smartphones, which are used by many millions of people worldwide. The main
      impact has been at the scientific end of the spectrum leading to an
      accuracy improvement by a factor of 2.5 in the computed satellite orbits
      [b].
    These techniques were adopted as standard in 2010 by the International
      GNSS Service, a voluntary federation of more than 200 worldwide agencies
      that generates precise open-data GPS and GNSS products. The IGS produces
      daily orbit calculations for all satellites; its adoption of the
      techniques developed through UCL's work allowed it to improve its orbit
      accuracy from 5cm to 2cm. IGS data usage is characterised by 700,000 site
      visits a year, with circa 90 million downloads [e]. This data is used to
      determine the terrestrial reference frame (TRF), the system of coordinates
      used for monitoring the shape of the earth. The TRF forms the fundamental
      basis for monitoring plate tectonics and height variation at tide gauges,
      among other applications such as modelling sea level change and
      post-glacial rebound, as well as commercial positioning services.
    
ImpactSummary

    Departmental research led to changes in how radiation forces on several
      classes of space vehicle (low earth orbit environmental measurement
      satellites and medium earth orbit navigation missions like GPS) are
      modelled by two NASA laboratories (Jet Propulsion Laboratory and Goddard
      Space Flight Centre). This includes NASA's adoption of a UCL model as an
      operational standard for Jason-1, which measured global sea level change
      from 2001 to 2013. Jason-1 measurements are a critical component of data
      supplied to the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change, thereby feeding
      into policy formulation seeking to mitigate the effects of climate change
      upon the entire population of Earth. The techniques also changed the way
      in which GPS satellite orbits are calculated, with products used by many
      millions of users.
    
UnderpinningResearch

    Space geodesy uses satellites to measure planet characteristics such as
      gravity field, sea level and ice cap variations, and tectonics. Modelling
      the forcing effects of radiation (solar, terrestrial and radiation from
      the satellites) is important for accurate predictions of GPS (and other)
      satellite orbital trajectories. GPS positioning accuracy depends directly
      upon our ability to determine, and predict, satellite orbits. Millions of
      real-time users rely upon navigation devices decoding messages that
      include mathematical models of instantaneous satellite locations &#8212; this
      relies fundamentally upon accurate satellite force models. Put another
      way, mis-modelling satellite motion introduces errors into user position
      estimates.
    Novel research on modelling space vehicle surface forces was undertaken
      between 2001 and 2007 by Marek Ziebart (Professor of Space Geodesy, at UCL
      since 2000) and his team (primarily Ant Sibthorpe, now at NASA JPL, at UCL
      2002-2008, and Sima Adhya, now running a space mission insurance group in
      the City of London, at UCL 2002-2005). Ziebart developed these ideas [1]
      in his PhD and through further EPSRC and NERC-funded projects whilst at
      UCL. The major developments &#8212; specifically design and implementation of
      novel tool sets, and extension of the basic concepts &#8212; all took place at
      UCL (2001-2007). The project demonstrated that high-accuracy radiation
      flux models, detailed computer simulations of space vehicle geometry and
      attitude, and surface material properties (both optical and thermal) could
      be used in a novel and original fashion to model radiation surface forces
      on satellites for engineering, scientific and commercial applications [3].
      The approach broke new ground and was well received by the engineering and
      scientific community because although the effects were known to be
      important, existing approaches were considered overly simplistic and
      error-prone.
    The techniques developed (efficient spacecraft surface modelling, custom
      ray-tracing methods, treatment of thermal response of both satellite
      multi-layered insulation and solar panels, earth radiation force modelling
      and antenna thrust modelling [3,4,5]) led to research collaboration (from
      2003) with NASA Jet Propulsion Laboratory, NASA Goddard Space Flight
      Centre and the US Air Force Research Laboratory. The UCL team proved their
      approach's effectiveness to determine satellite positions in 2004 [2,3].
      Improvements were shown in quality metrics both in orbit prediction (for
      GPS satellites) and in sea surface height models (for altimetry
      satellites). UCL space vehicle surface force models for satellite
      altimetry platforms were subsequently adopted by NASA in 2010 for
      operational production of orbits for scientific data processing.
    Specific innovations developed during the 2001-2007 programme of research
      include: using geometric primitives to reduce computational runtime; using
      pixel arrays and enhanced ray-tracing methods to model radiation
      interactions with satellite surfaces; modelling thermal forces on multi-
      layered insulation; developing models of thermal gradients across solar
      panels; modelling short and long-wavelength earth radiation fluxes; and
      modelling antenna output thrust. These models were rigorously tested by
      research groups external to UCL and were found to be superior to all other
      approaches [6].
    