CaseStudyId: 30007
Title: 
    Development and transplant of human organs using nanocomposite
        materials
    

ImpactDetails

    Its work on next-generation biomaterials and development of the patented
      POSS nanocomposite polymers allowed the UCL research team to bring the
      first fully synthetic organ into the clinical setting. This has had a
      transformative effect on organ development and replacement therapies and,
      in turn, the outcomes for and wellbeing of patients around the world.
    Introduction of new therapy: Although it is possible to surgically
      resect tracheal tumours, most are already of an inoperable size by the
      time of diagnosis. As such, the synthetic trachea addressed a pressing
      clinical requirement for alternative therapeutic options. In 2011, a
      patient with advanced tracheal cancer who had exhausted all existing
      treatment options was referred to cardiothoracic surgeon Professor
      Macchiarini at the Karolinska Institutet, Stockholm. In turn, Macchiarini
      approached Seifalian for help. Seifalian used his POSS-PCU polymer [output
      1] and knowledge of developing and seeding 3D scaffolds [output 4] to
      manufacture the synthetic trachea implant, which consisted of a 12cm
      trachea along with two bronchi &#8212; the largest such implant ever attempted
      and the world's first wholly tissue-engineered synthetic organ
        transplant [a,b]. By using the patient's CT scans, Seifalian was
      able to model the implant on the exact dimensions of the patient's own
      trachea, making implantation significantly easier. Mechanically, the
      synthetic trachea had similar properties to a native organ, including
      ring-like cartilage structures, with porous materials between them
      allowing 15% stretchability. UCL's researchers developed a bioreactor for
      the organ's development, which dripped the patient's own stem cells onto
      the porous scaffold under physiological conditions in an incubator.
      Because it used his own stem cells, there was no need for the patient to
      take the immunosuppressive drugs required after donor transplants. The
      trachea and bronchi were implanted in June 2011; more than two years on,
      the patient has a functioning organ and is doing very well. Describing the
      implantation and its effects, Professor of Laryngology at the Royal
      National Throat, Nose and Ear Hospital said: "This is the first time that
      a trachea made from a synthetic scaffold (here repopulated using stem
      cells), has preserved life and quality of life for longer than a few
      months...follow up is now 2.5 years" [c].
    This was the first instance in which doctors had ever been able to
      manufacture human organs using synthetic scaffolds, and then incorporate
      autologous stem cells. As such, the work not only saved the life of the
      patient in whom the synthetic trachea was implanted, but revolutionised
        the development of organs more broadly. The success of previous
      lab-generated transplants, which lined a decellularised donor trachea with
      the patient's stem cells, had been limited by a number of problems that
      Seifalian's trachea was able to overcome. These included the very real
      difficulties of obtaining the necessary donor organs; even assuming that
      these could be found, moreover, the decellularising is suitable only for
      small sections of trachea, rather than an entire organ, and risks damaging
      their underlying structure, leading to their collapse once they are
      implanted in the patient. The danger of donor cells not being completely
      removed produces a further, significant risk of prompting a potentially
      serious immune system response in the organ recipient [c]. The
      considerable comparative benefits of Seifalian's synthetic organ
      development are explained by a Professor of Plastic Surgery at the Royal
      Free Hospital, who explains that the POSS nanocomposite: "provides a
      platform to create innovative solutions to reconstructive problems facing
      military and civilian casualties. It has applications in many regions of
      the body... It has the advantage of being a material that can be modified
      to allow tissue integration or to reduce adhesion as well as being
      biodegradable and non biodegradable" [g]. The global significance of the
      contribution made by the synthetic trachea to organ development and
      replacement was acknowledged by Seifalian's receipt of the "most
      innovative new product" award at the 2012 Life Science Awards in Germany
      [f].
    The research has, moreover, been used to develop organs other than the
      synthetic trachea. These include lacrimal (tear) ducts, which have
      been implanted into five patients since September 2010. Without treatment,
      patients whose tear ducts have had to be removed because of cancer or
      trauma, would have constantly watering eyes, making effective replacement
      imperative for those affected. The UCL tear duct conduit, which is made
      from nanocomposite polymer and coated with silver nanoparticle, replaces
      the previous standard therapeutic use of a glass tube to direct tears into
      the nasal cavity, a practice with generally poor clinical outcomes and a
      high risk of breakage. The surgeon who performed the surgery in several
      patients reports that complications have been almost non-existent and tear
      flow well-regulated [d]. The conduit was filed for patent in 2011 [h].
    The UCL team has also developed the world's first bypass graft
        capable of in-situ endothelialisation from the patient's own
      endothelial progenitor stem cells in circulating blood. Bypass grafts can
      be manufactured using a specially designed and developed automated
      extrusion system, which produces grafts up to 100cm in length with a
      diameter ranging from 1-16mm, suitable for replacing even long blood
      vessels in legs. Vascular bypass grafts were carried out in two patients
      in 2010 and 2011; both patients are doing well. POSS-PCU is a particularly
      suitable material for cardiovascular devices because of its
      anti-thrombogenicity and viscoelastic properties. In October 2013,
      clinical trials of the use of this graft for coronary artery bypass began
      at Heart Hospital London, and of vascular access at Royal Free Hospital.
      [e]
    Commercial impacts: UCL has used the research to develop more than
      10 patents, with the POSS polymer granted a US patent in 2010 [j].
      A number of other patents have been filed since 2008, including a heart
      valve prosthesis made from POSS-PCU, and synthetic scaffolds and organ and
      tissue transplantation [j]. Seifalian's POSS materials have also begun to
      produce commercial benefits, with new businesses established to
      commercialise the technology. These include SmartTech, set up in 2013 as a
      joint venture with Pharmidex and Flexicare Medical, which is
      commercialising the use of POSS-PCL for nerve regeneration and stents.
      Another spinout business, Belsize Polymer, was also established in May
      2013 in order to take organs including trachea, facial organs and breast
      filler to clinical trial and commercialisation [j].
    
ImpactSummary

    Researchers in UCL's Centre for Nanotechnology and Regenerative Medicine
      have pioneered a transformative therapy using their platform technology of
      next-generation nanocomposite biomaterials to create wholly synthetic
      human organs for transplant, including the world's first synthetic
      trachea, lacrimal (tear) ducts and bypass grafts. These products improve
      patient outcomes in situations where conventional therapies have not
      worked. Because the organs are functionalised with peptides and
      antibodies, as well as seeded with the patients' own stem cells, patients
      do not require immunosuppression. A university spinout company has been
      set up to commercialise the use of UCL's patented nanomaterial for
      cardiovascular devices as well as other organs.
    
UnderpinningResearch

    Biomimetics involves the extraction and exploitation of biological design
      principles found in nature. There is a close relationship between nano-,
      micro- and macroscale structures and their chemical function in biological
      systems. Macro-scale architectural mimicry attempts to replicate
      biophysical properties such as 3D structure, and mechanical (elasticity,
      strength) and surface (roughness) properties. At the micro- and
      nano-scale, however, the focus of biomimicry is the biochemical and
      nanotopographical replication of materials, enabling precise matching to
      the structure and function of complex natural materials.
    Since 2004, Alexander Seifalian (Professor of Nanotechnology and
      Regenerative Medicine, UCL 1998-present) has led a multidisciplinary team
      of physicists, materials scientists, engineers, biologists and clinicians
      in work on biomimicry at UCL. The research team has used the approach
      outlined above to generate a range of technologies for the development of
      human organs. Taking its inspiration from natural structures such as
      butterfly wings, the team seeks to mimic covalent nanostructures within a
      polymer matrix. The Morpho butterfly's wings, for example, are
      superhydrophobic due to nanoscale surface roughness; replicating this
      quality in a biomaterial can help inhibit infection after surgery.
    In 2005, Seifalian developed and patented two novel non-biodegradable and
      bioabsorbable nanocomposite polymers based on the integration of the
      nanocage, polyhedral oligomeric silsesquioxane (POSS) (core structure 1.5
      nm), into a backbone of poly(carbonate-urea)urethane (PCU) [1]. In further
      extensive studies conducted (under good laboratory practice [GLP] and god
      manufacturing practice [GMP]) between 2007 and 2011, Seifalian performed in
        vivo toxicology and biocompatibility testing with these POSS-PCU
      nanocomposite materials. The research showed that the incorporation of
      POSS with polyurethane protects the structure's flexibility and elasticity
      from oxidative and hydrolytic degradation. Indeed, POSS-PCU was shown to
      exhibit a range of properties making it a desirable material for organ
      regeneration scaffolds: it is non-toxic, exceptionally biocompatible,
      biostable, and supportive of the attachment and proliferation of various
      cell types. POSS-PCU is particularly suited for cardiovascular
      applications due to its oxidative and hydrolytic stability and inherent
      ability to prevent blood clot formation. The concept of incorporating
      POSS-PCU was subsequently used in synthesising `smart' scaffolds to
      regenerate a multitude of organs and tissues, including for use in
      paediatric patients.
    The potential to deliver `smart' organ development scaffolds was expanded
      further by the research team's production of the second polymer, POSS-PCL
      (poly(caprolactone urea-urethane) [2]. A different member of the POSS
      nanocomposite family, POSS-PCL is the bioabsorbable version of POSS-PCU.
      Further research conducted at UCL demonstrated that, whilst POSS-PCL
      shares POSS-PCU's inherent versatility, its better able to be fine-tuned
      in terms of its stability: more specifically, it showed that the
      degradation of POSS-PCL could be controlled using either hydrophilic
      groups in the soft segment (polyester groups), or amino acids in the hard
      segment of the polymer backbone. This finding allowed the research team to
      control the rate of POSS-PCL degradation from 8 weeks to 12 months. The
      implications of this discovery for organ development were significant,
      since it meant that POSS-PCL could both be used to provide an initial 3D
      scaffold to support cells, and would then degrade at the same pace as new
      tissue formed. Different organs require varying levels of bioabsorbtion &#8212;
      for example, skin needs 8 weeks while a nerve conduit slowly biodegrades
      over 12 months. In children, this means that as the biological matrix
      grows, the synthetic scaffolding materials can be gradually bioabsorbed
      and replaced by biological material.
    Using the nanocomposite polymer to create organs required Seifalian's
      team to manufacture 3D scaffolds from it, functionalised with proteins and
      peptides and/or seeded with stem cells. To this end, Seifalian conceived a
      number of extrusion methods, including coagulation phase inversion [3],
      casting, electrospinning, and 3D organ printing (bioprinting). His
      research team used a series of bioreactors to study cell/tissue
      development using stem cell technology. Further research into
      nanoparticles, such as fume silica, quantum dots, and gold and silver
      nanoparticles, allowed them to attach peptides and antibodies to the
      scaffold, as well as to track stem cells and their differentiation [4].
      Together, these developments enabled the manufacture of synthetic organs
      specifically tailored for individual patients based on CT scans of their
      native organs. Development focused on the production of synthetic trachea,
      bypass graft, oesophagus and membrane patches.
    Using these platform technologies, Seifalian's team implanted the world's
      first synthetic trachea in 2011 [5]. They have also implanted the first
      synthetic tear duct with silver-coated nanoparticle; vascular bypass
      graft; and (as compassionate cases) nose and ear, which Seifalian plans to
      take to clinical trial. In vitro and in vivo tests
      conducted under GLP in 2012 showed that the grafts developed by the UCL
      team performed much better than control grafts, made of PTFE
      (polytetrafluoroethylene). Whilst all of the control bypass grafts became
      blocked within the first 14 days after implantation, just 15% of the UCL
      grafts suffered blockages over the nine-month period of the trials. Other
      organs under development include a transcatheter heart valve and stents
      for both for paediatric and adult patients (both at preclinical stage
      under GLP) [6], as well as urethra bladder cardiac patch and bone, all of
      which are still at R&amp;D stages.
    