CaseStudyId: 30003
Title: 
    Health and economic benefits resulting from the development of
        non-invasive growing prostheses
    

ImpactDetails

    The research presented in section 2 was vital to the development of a
      licensed implant which now forms part of the Stanmore Juvenile Tumour
      System &#8212; a customised endoprothesis for use in children after massive bone
      removal. The implant has benefited paediatric patients and healthcare
      providers around the world, while also having a significant commercial
      benefit for the licence holder, Stanmore Implants Worldwide (SIW).
    Development and commercial adoption of a new technology, with
        wide-ranging subsequent economic benefits: A full UK and
      US patent on the technology was granted in 2001 [a]. A licence
      to manufacture the device was granted to Stanmore Implants by the tech
      transfer company at UCL in 2007. Stanmore Implants, originally a UCL
      spinout company, was then sold for &#163;10 million in February 2008 [k]. In
      2011, the device received FDA approval for use in the USA [b]. In the USA
      the market for this product is estimated to be worth over $30 million. The
      device has now been used in 15 countries worldwide, including the US. More
      than 400 devices have been sold around the world since 2008. This has
      provided Stanmore Implants Ltd., a UCL spin-out company set up to
      commercialise the research, with an income of over &#163;6 million [d].
    A recent US study assessed the cost of a non-invasive lengthening
      procedure at $267, compared with approximately $8,000 if surgery is
      required [b]. On average, a patient with an invasive device would have six
      surgical interventions over the course of their growth period and the
      calculated saving would be over $46,000. In the UK, the cost to the NHS of
      performing a single invasive lengthening procedure &#8212; including the costs
      of a two-night stay in hospital and the operation is &#163;3,500. On this basis
      alone, using the non-invasive implant, which in the UK costs &#163;18,000,
      produces a saving of around &#163;19,000 per patient. If we factor in freeing
      up operating facilities and surgeon time then the saving increases even
      more. In a number of patients who would have had an invasive prosthesis
      there would been an increased infection risk with a even greater cost
      implication. Given that about 50 children require this procedure in the UK
      each year, the use of the non-invasive technology therefore allows UK
      health service savings of over &#163;10m per annum, the "hidden" savings
      including the cost of in-patient care, rehabilitation and the
      inconvenience associated with invasive lengthening for both the patient
      and their family.
    Provision of a superior surgical device: In a study presented to
      the American Academy of Orthopaedic Surgeons (AAOS) 2012 Annual Meeting,
      the Stanmore endoprosthesis compared favourably to other mechanical
      prostheses on the market with a higher MSTS (Musculoskeletal Tumour
      Society) score than other available devices, with a score of 27.4 (out of
      30). The score is an internationally recognised method of evaluating
      endoprostheses, with the system assigning numerical values (0-5) for each
      of six categories: function and emotional acceptance, pain, walking and
      gait quality for lower limbs, functioning in upper limbs, demographic
      information and patient satisfaction.
    Likewise, only three implants failed to extend, out of a series of 44
      patients followed up for between 22 to 104 months [output 5, above]. The
      UCL research team developed a programme of testing for each individual
      device before they were implanted and there have been just 12 failures of
      the 400 devices that have been sold since 2008. These implants have been
      sold over the entire world [d].
    Describing the UCL growing prosthesis, the President of the British
      Orthopaedic Association said: "as an orthopaedic surgeon who specialises
      in sarcoma treatment and working in a world-renowned centre for bone
      cancer surgery, this innovation has changed the way I treat these
      patients." [h] Certainly, the prosthesis developed by Professor Blunn and
      his team demonstrates reproducibility and reliability superior to other
      implants extendable in situ. It has a much lower failure rate than
      mechanical lengthening prostheses: in one clinical trial of a rival
      device, mechanical failure affected 7 of 15 implanted devices [c]. In
      comparison, in a series reported in 2011 from the Royal National
      Orthopaedic Hospital in London, of 55 children aged between 5 and 16 who
      underwent reconstruction with the UCL prosthesis, 10 of the 11 patients
      (20%) who were skeletally mature at follow-up had equal leg lengths and
      nine had a full range of movement of the hip and knee. Such is the
      superiority of the UCL growing prosthesis, in fact, that a number of the
      devices supplied by Stanmore Implants have been used to revise competitor
      implants that have a high failure rate.
    Improved health, welfare and patient wellbeing: In direct
      comparison to surgical treatment, the use of the UCL-developed prosthesis
      reduces, by an average of six per patient, the number of surgical
      interventions &#8212; with all their attendant risks of infection and additional
      trauma &#8212; required. Additionally, after insertion, the prostheses can be
      extended more gradually than other invasive expandable implants and for
      this reason nerve palsies, stiffness and pain is reduced [f, g]. The
      reduced pain and trauma, as well as the reduced risk of infection
      associated with this new technology is particularly welcome given its use
      to treat young patients. Each year in the United Kingdom, approximately 50
      child sarcomas necessitate limb salvage surgery for children who need an
      extendable implant able to be lengthened periodically to keep pace with
      the growth in the opposite limb. The UCL-developed prosthesis delivers a
      good functional outcome and numerous patient benefits in comparison with
      both standard treatment and other non-invasive implants. Since 200, it has
      been the standard UK treatment for children with these bone cancers,
      although some minimally invasive devices are still used. Using
      electromagnetic induction, the prosthesis allows for gradual, painless
      controlled extension that can be undertaken in the clinic, reducing the
      need for repeated surgeries with the attendant increased risks of
      infection and the inconvenience and distress of hospitalisation for the
      patient. Furthermore, after the initial implantation surgery, no
      anaesthesia is required for the lengthening process. The device also has
      wider applications than paediatric patients: 1-2% of the implants using it
      have been to treat skeletally mature patients with shortening after failed
      joint replacement surgery [e].
    The Macmillan Nurse Consultant &amp; Lead Cancer Nurse in charge of the
      day-to-day care of paediatric patients at the Royal National Orthopaedic
      Hospital indicates that: "Patients no longer have to fear repeated surgery
      and more scars from surgery. It increases patient participation and
      ownership in their physical recovery and rehabilitation. The lengthening
      procedure is now coordinated and undertaken in a nurse-led clinic. This
      has resulted in reduced hospital stays, consultant surgeon and
      anaesthetist time and physiotherapy requirements. The lengthening
      procedure is completely painless for the patient and many patients have
      reported this time as being therapeutic as they sit and talk with the
      nurse. In conclusion, the non-invasive growing implant provides multiple
      patient benefits and improved patient outcomes whilst also reducing
      clinical risks and financial costs related to hospitalisation." [i]
    The mother of a teenage patient said: "The implant is remarkable. It
      means that as long as the cancer stays away, she can grow gradually
      without having regular follow-up surgery... Until five years ago, Sophia
      would probably have had to have her leg amputated." [j]
    
ImpactSummary

    A team of biomedical engineers at UCL has developed a non-invasive
      growing implant that improves the health and quality of life of young
      patients who have suffered from certain bone cancers. The prosthesis
      avoids the costly and invasive surgical interventions of previous
      treatment. Instead, the prosthesis can be lengthened in a quick and
      pain-free procedure conducted at an outpatient clinic. As a result, it
      reduces the costs of bone reconstruction and growing by around &#163;19,000 per
      patient, as well as reducing the risk of infection and subsequent
      treatment. Since 2008, more than 400 devices have been sold; in addition
      to the cost savings indicated above these devices have generated more than
      &#163;6 million income for UCL spin-out company Stanmore Implants Ltd, which
      was sold for &#163;10 million in 2008.
    
UnderpinningResearch

    The standard treatment for bone tumours is surgical removal followed by
      replacement with either a transplant or a fixed metallic implant, usually
      incorporating a joint replacement device. In children, however, the use of
      fixed-length prostheses can result in different limb lengths, as the
      continued skeletal growth in healthy bone fails to be matched in a limb
      with a metallic implant. Modular and invasive extendible implants allowing
      growth of the affected limb have been developed since the 1970s in
      response to this problem. The first-ever growing prosthesis was extended
      invasively; this device was superseded by a number of other commercial
      invasive devices. For example, a device developed at UCL in the 1990s
      involved inserting larger and larger spacers to extend the prosthesis.
      Whilst these invasive prostheses allow affected limb lengthening, they
      require repeated surgical procedures in order to induce it. Moreover,
      despite providing good functional and psychological outcomes, these
      invasive extendible endoprotheses were associated with a high risk of
      complications including joint stiffness, nerve injury and aseptic
      loosening. Their use in children is also a risk factor for infection, with
      prosthetic lengthening subjecting children to increases in infection rates
      of up to 5% per procedure, depending on the site of the prosthesis.
    Gordon Blunn, Professor of Biomedical Engineering at UCL's Institute of
      Orthopaedics &amp; Musculoskeletal Science and a member of UCL staff since
      1986, aimed to overcome these challenges and produce an endoprosthesis
      that could be lengthened within the body without the need for extensive
      surgery. To attain this goal, other UCL staff contributed expertise
      related to implant engineering design (Dr Meswania, Senior Research
      Fellow) and the measurement of forces acting on orthopaedic implants in
      vivo (Dr Steve Taylor, Senior Research Fellow), especially the development
      of instrumented versions of implants for measuring the forces acting
      across them in selected subjects. Surgeons at the Royal National
      Orthopaedic Hospital conducted the medical and surgical work required to
      put the research findings into practice.
    UCL research published in 1998 measured and calculated the forces needed
      to distract invasive prostheses; those forces were found to be up to 1513
      N [1]. This research led UCL staff to develop a prototype prosthesis, the
      design of which was based on an electric motor along with a super magnet
      and a high reduction gearbox, all contained within the prosthesis.
      Research published in 2006 provided a detailed account of the use and
      potential of the prototype implant in the first seven patients into whom
      it was implanted, who had a mean age of 12.1 years at the time of surgery
      [2]. It showed that forces exerted within the drive unit needed to be
      refined and that, to do so, the device's drive unit needed to be
      remodelled to provide greater electromagnetic force.
    Subsequent research, published in a 2008 paper [3] detailed the
      refinements made to the prosthesis as it came closer to its current
      design. Magnetically coupled drive technology was used, including a
      synchronous motor with a gear-driven telescopic shaft. In this design, the
      stator was an external device used to extend the prosthesis remotely as
      the patient grew. This compact external drive produced a focused magnetic
      flux that did not require cooling and operated on a single-phase power
      supply. The extending mechanism was able to overcome up to 1300 N force,
      the force exerted by the soft tissues during the lengthening procedure.
      The force needed to overcome the restraint of the soft tissues was
      measured during extension of the invasive devices in 20 patients.
    In the implant the magnet turns a lubricated and sealed gearbox, which
      has 23 discrete parts and a reduction of 13,000:1. Due to space
      limitations, the gearbox and magnet used to extend the prosthesis fit
      within a cylinder measuring 20mm by 25mm. This is the diameter of the
      resected bone and allows for maximum extension. The gearbox turns a power
      screw, which extends the body of the implant. To ensure adequate strength,
      this device was further tested under a cyclic sinusoidal load producing a
      peak direct compressive load of 2,271 N, a peak medial bending of 56.8 Nm
      and torsion of 9 Nm. This simulated the loading conditions of an implant
      in a patient. The test was in Ringers' solution, at body temperature, for
      10 million cycles. At every 1 million cycles the prosthesis was extended.
    Critical to successful extension of the device in vivo &#8212; and
      essential to generate the required force &#8212; was the development of a unique
      gear with a missing tooth. That missing tooth meant that the rotation of
      the mechanism was slightly askew, enabling more powerful extension for the
      same amount of reduction.
    Further articles building on this work were published between 2009 and
      2012 and showed the need for comprehensive pre-clinical testing of the
      device before its installation, in order to ensure lower failure rates
      once in patients following trials in larger patient cohorts [4, 5].
    