CaseStudyId: 30507
Title: 
    Synthetic weather sequences informing engineering design and supporting
      decisions about infrastructure
    

ImpactDetails

    Society and infrastructure are vulnerable to weather-related hazards
      including floods, droughts and wind storms. To protect against such
      hazards, engineers and policymakers must assess the effectiveness of
      potential hazard mitigation and management strategies. To do this, it is
      becoming increasingly common to build computer simulators of the systems
      of interest, and to generate synthetic weather sequences to drive these
      simulators and determine the system response. The research described above
      has underpinned UCL's development of a software package, GLIMCLIM, for
      generating such synthetic weather sequences.
    The main mechanism by which impact has been achieved is via the
      increasing use of GLIMCLIM to generate synthetic weather sequences for use
      in engineering and water resource management applications. Some examples
      are as follows:
    Improved calculations of rainfall and flood mapping: The
      engineering consultancy Halcrow (now part of CH2M HILL) has used the
      software as part of three projects (one since 2008) relating to flood
      mapping and flood defence construction [A]. In each case the software was
      used alongside other methods, most of which are more standard in the
      application area, to provide rainfall scenarios that can be used to
      estimate flood extent and river flows. The rationale for using GLIMCLIM
      alongside these other methods is that it is more conceptually defensible
      but less familiar within the industry; it was therefore seen to provide an
      "independent verification" of the more standard calculations. Taking into
      account the use of other methods alongside GLIMCLIM in these projects,
      Halcrow's Senior Hydrologist estimates that since 2008 the software has
      provided a value of around &#163;5,000 to the company [A].
    Informing Environment Agency recommendations: The software is
      becoming recognised as a state-of-the-art tool for advanced use in
      applications that require it. For example, the Environment Agency proposed
      that Anglian Water make use of GLIMCLIM to model rainfall in a realistic
      way, for use in the design of their flood defences. This demonstrates that
      the research has not only informed the Agency's awareness and
      understanding of available modelling techniques, but has also improved
      their ability to make informed suggestions about the design of storm
      overflows at Anglian Water. The Environment Agency, in a letter to Anglian
      Water dated 10 October 2012 [B], explain that they expect improvements to
      storm overflows to be designed following the principles set out in the
      Urban Pollution Management (UPM) manual. These principles are that "simple
      models and assumed data may be used where they lead to protective
      (conservative) solutions" but that "more refined techniques [of which
      GLIMCLIM is an example] are appropriate where they lead to a reduction in
      the combined cost of the modelling and the solution" [B]. The Environment
      Agency letter goes on to say that Anglian Water's "designs have generally
      assumed rain falls uniformly across the catchment varying only in time.
      This simplified approach conforms to the above UPM principle but clearly
      leaves scope for improved realism. We therefore support the principle of
      modelling rainfall in a more true to life way as proposed by James Lau and
      Christian Onof" [B]. The proposal of these researchers (at Imperial
      College London) was to use GLIMCLIM to generate realistic rainfall
      sequences [C].
    Development of climate change projections: In Australia, GLIMCLIM
      is one of the primary tools being used in the development of an agreed set
      of climate change projections for the state of South Australia, in a
      project involving collaboration between universities, CSIRO and state
      government agencies [D]. This work is on-going and will result in the
      production of hydrological models that will be critical in the planning
      required to adapt the state's water resource management strategies to
      future climate conditions.
    These examples are included to indicate that the software is being used,
      and that it is recognised as a state-of-the-art tool. Unfortunately,
      however, it is not easy to track the use of such tools outside the
      academic community, so the full extent of its uptake cannot be
      established.
    Informing water resource management strategies: Although GLIMCLIM
      has been the main vehicle for dissemination of the research, it is not the
      only one; the results from the precipitation trend analysis for southwest
      Western Australia (see section 2) are being used to inform water resource
      management strategies in that state.
    The results of the trend analysis were summarised in an animation of
      statewide rainfall changes from 1940 to 2010, demonstrating clearly a
      substantial decline in rainfall over the last 30 years except in the most
      southwesterly corner of the state. The Water Supply Planning Branch of
      Western Australia's Department of Water (DoW) used this animation at a
      meeting of the Water Supply Planning senior officers group on 21 July
      2011, to "create a sense of urgency that the drying climate and increasing
      number of dry seasons are impacting on Perth's existing water supplies"
      and to support the argument that Perth urgently needed a new water source
      [E]. A Supervising Engineer at Surface Water Assessment, DoW, reported:
      "The decision at the end of the meeting was that DoW prepares an urgent
      cabinet submission to government on the need for a new water source for
      the IWSS [integrated water supply scheme]. The outcome is that cabinet
      approved the expansion of the Binningup Desalination Plant in July 2011."
      [E]
    The Southern (Binningup) Seawater Desalination Plant was first opened in
      September 2011, providing 50 billion litres of water to Perth and the
      surrounding area per year. Seawater desalination is a more expensive means
      of providing potable water than traditional groundwater or surface water
      sources, but because it does not depend on rainfall it has become an
      important water supply source in the increasingly dry climate of Western
      Australia. The animation of rainfall changes in the state, produced from
      UCL research, was instrumental in securing state approval for the
      expansion of the plant [E] to provide 100 billion litres of water per
      year, twice the original capacity [F, G]. This expansion, which cost
      AUS$450 million [F] and was completed in January 2013, enables the plant
      to now produce almost one third of Perth's water supply [G], benefiting
      around 600,000 people in the city.
    The animation was also used within the REF impact period for informing
      community groups and the general public about the need to expand the plant
      and to justify the high costs involved. For example, it was used in a
      presentation given by the Water Allocation Planning Branch of the DoW to
      the Jandakot Community Consultative Committee [E], and it was shown on
      state television as a means of communicating to the public the need to
      spend such a large amount of money.
    
ImpactSummary

    Research conducted in UCL's Department of Statistical Science has led to
      the development of a state-of-the-art software package for generating
      synthetic weather sequences, which has been widely adopted, both in the UK
      and abroad. The synthetic sequences are used by engineers and policymakers
      when assessing the effectiveness of potential mitigation and management
      strategies for weather-related hazards such as floods. In the UK, the
      software package is used for engineering design; for example, to inform
      the design of flood defences. In Australia it is being used to inform
      climate change adaptation strategies. Another significant impact is that
      UCL's analysis of rainfall trends in southwest Western Australia directly
      supported the decision of the state's Department of Water to approve the
      expansion of a seawater desalination plant at a cost of around AUS$450
      million. The capacity of the plant was doubled to 100 billion litres per
      year in January 2013 and it now produces nearly one third of Perth's water
      supply.
    
UnderpinningResearch

    The underpinning research centred on the use of generalised linear models
      (GLMs) for simulating daily climate time series at multiple spatial
      locations. Although GLMs had been widely established in statistics for
      around two decades by the mid-1990s, their potential for the applications
      considered here had not been recognised. Barriers to their use included
      limited interaction between the statistics and climate/engineering
      communities, difficulties in representing the complex structures in
      observed weather sequences, and challenges relating to the analysis of
      large spatiotemporal data sets. A further challenge was to provide
      efficient algorithms for simulating dependent sequences at multiple
      spatial locations. Multi-site Gaussian simulation was widely studied;
      however, at fine timescales (e.g. daily), many weather variables &#8212; notably
      precipitation and wind speed &#8212; have distributions that are far from
      Gaussian and the range of tools for handling such situations was (and
      remains) much more limited.
    Against this background, a programme of research within UCL's Department
      of Statistical Science sought to build on the limited previous
      applications of GLMs to climate data, firstly by demonstrating how the
      complex structures in such data can be represented tractably within the
      GLM framework using flexible basis functions and, in particular,
      interactions between covariates representing seasonal and regional
      variation along with temporal autocorrelation [1, 2]; next by developing
      simulation algorithms for non-Gaussian situations, motivated in particular
      by the need to generate synthetic precipitation sequences for hydrological
      applications [3]; and finally by addressing some of the issues of
      statistical inference, uncertainty assessment and model intercomparison
      that arise in the analysis of large space-time data sets [4, 5]. More
      recent developments have focused on the characterisation of trends in
      precipitation in particular, with specific and high-impact applications in
      southwest Western Australia. An initial small-scale study is reported in
      reference [6]; this identified spatially varying time trends in rainfall
      over a small part of the region and was subsequently developed further,
      using nonparametric statistical techniques, to form the basis for the
      fourth example cited in section 4 below.
    The programme has been led by Richard Chandler (Research Associate
      1994-1997; Lecturer in Statistics 1997-2004; Senior Lecturer in Statistics
      2004-2013; Professor of Statistics 2013) since the mid-1990s, working with
      postdoctoral researchers Zhongwei Yan (2000-2001), Chi Yang (2002-2005)
      and Chiara Ambrosino (2011-2013). On-going collaborations with Bryson
      Bates and Stephen Charles at CSIRO (the Commonwealth Scientific and
      Industrial Research Organisation) have led to widespread
      interest in the work in Australia. As the work has evolved,
      the developments have been incorporated into the GLIMCLIM software
      package, a tool created by UCL's Chandler for generating synthetic weather
      sequences.
    This research programme has been application-driven throughout, so the
      most appropriate dissemination outlets have often been outside the
      traditional statistical literature. Moreover, to encourage uptake of the
      methods by non-statisticians (particularly those outside academia), the
      work has focused on the provision of transparent, easily implemented,
      computationally efficient but nonetheless statistically rigorous ways of
      doing things.
    