CaseStudyId: 30511
Title: 
    Radon exposure: Informing advisory guidelines
    

ImpactDetails

    Radon is the single biggest source of public radiation exposure in the UK
      and is responsible for an estimated 1,100 lung cancer deaths a year [A].
      Prior to the case-control studies of domestic radon described in section
      2, it was generally thought that radon-related lung cancer occurred mainly
      in individuals exposed to the gas at very high concentrations. This belief
      arose because most of the previous evidence of a link between radon
      exposure and lung cancer came from studies of miners who had been exposed
      to high doses occupationally. Consequently, guidelines issued by official
      public health bodies &#8212; both nationally and internationally &#8212; focused
      almost entirely on the avoidance of high exposures above certain levels.
    The finding of the domestic studies that there is a clearly detectable
      risk of lung cancer at radon concentrations below the minimum levels for
      intervention suggests, however, that the majority of radon-related lung
      cancers occur in people exposed to only moderate concentrations; the risk
      is low, but in the absence of preventive measures many more people are
      exposed to the gas at these levels. This research finding therefore has
      substantial implications for the most appropriate way to reduce the
      average public exposure to radon, with a shift in emphasis from
      measurement and remediation in existing homes to the installation of
      preventive measures &#8212; such as thicker and better sealed damp-proof
      membranes in floors &#8212; in large numbers of new homes. This change in
      emphasis has been highlighted in national and international reports
      evaluating the public health aspects of radon.
    In the UK, the Health Protection Agency (HPA) has, since 2008, provided
      government with updated advice about the risk of radon, which replaced the
      previous advice published in 1990 by the National Radiological Protection
      Board. This updated advice was influenced by the research findings of the
      European pooling study (references [2] and [3] in section 3) and consisted
      of recommendations about building regulations made in 2008 [B], followed
      by further advice in 2010 on limiting public exposure to radon [C].
      Recognition that there is a risk of lung cancer from radon concentrations
      below the UK intervention level (together with other factors) led the HPA
      to recommend to the Department of Health in the 2008 document that
      "building regulations and supporting documents should be amended to ensure
      that all new buildings, extensions, conversions and refurbished buildings
      in the UK include basic radon protective measures" [B].
    This advice was followed in 2009 by a substantial review by the HPA's
      independent Advisory Group on Ionising Radiation (AGIR) of the effects of
      radon on the health of the population [A], which further concluded that
      changes by government to building regulations have the potential to reduce
      the total number of deaths due to radon in a cost-effective way. The
      European pooling study is extensively cited in this document and provided
      important evidence that helped shape the AGIR's advice to the HPA; the
      report states: "The association between the long-term average residential
      radon concentration and the risk of lung cancer found in a pooled analysis
      of individual data from 13 European studies is the best current basis for
      risk estimation" [A]. It goes on to repeat the finding from the European
      pooling study that there is an estimated 16% increase in lung cancer risk
      per 100 Bq m-3 increase in concentration of radon gas. This
      estimate was used by the AGIR in a cost-benefit analysis, to evaluate the
      cost-effectiveness of current and possible future radon control policies
      for the UK. Amongst other things, this analysis concluded that (1) not
      only was the current government policy to install radon preventive methods
      in all new homes in areas with average concentrations above 52 Bq m-3
      cost-effective; but that (2) extending this requirement to all new homes
      nationwide would also be cost-effective and would avert considerably more
      lung cancers (242 in the first 10 years of the policy compared with 28)
      [A]. In response to the AGIR review, the HPA published its current advice
      to government in 2010 [C], which reiterates the recommendations of the
      AGIR and additionally recommends that a new Target Level of 100 Bq m-3
      should be introduced alongside the current Action Level of 200 Bq m-3.
      Preventive measures are already required in new homes if the probability
      of exceeding the Action Level is 1-3%; the Target Level is the
      concentration above which the HPA recommends householders seriously
      consider taking remedial action. Having two levels also "avoids the false
      impression that there is a clear boundary between safe and unsafe radon
      concentrations" [C]. This 2010 advisory document also states that the
      European pooling study provides the "best information on the risks from
      radon exposure in homes" currently available and repeats the findings of
      that work [C].
    Internationally, in 2009 the World Health Organization (WHO) published a
      handbook on indoor radon [D], designed to aid the development of national
      radon programmes and to inform stakeholders involved in radon control,
      such as the construction industry. This handbook also cites the European
      pooling study extensively, noting that it is the only one of the three
      existing pooling exercises (this one and two smaller ones involving US and
      Chinese data respectively) to correct for measurement error; indeed, the
      authors of the WHO report applied approximate corrections to the risk
      estimates from the other two studies to bring them into line with the
      European one [D]. Two conclusions of the WHO that are heavily dependent on
      the European pooling study are: "The majority of radon-induced lung
      cancers are caused by low and moderate radon concentrations rather than by
      high radon concentrations, because in general less people are exposed to
      high indoor radon concentrations", and "Radon is much more likely to cause
      lung cancer in people who smoke..." [D]. The handbook goes on to outline
      the implications for policy, such as the need to provide protection
      against low exposures. It also summarises the cost-benefit analysis in the
      AGIR report and highlights it as a good example of how to use the risk
      estimates as a scientific basis for policy making [D]. The increase in
      absolute risk from radon exposure for smokers was also highlighted in the
      2010 WHO guidelines on indoor air quality [E], where the different levels
      of risk according to smoking status were provided and the European pooling
      study was cited as one of the primary sources of evidence. These
      guidelines are targeted at public health professionals involved in
      preventing health risks of environmental exposures, and aim to provide a
      scientific basis for legally enforceable standards.
    The process of moving from reports by committees to changes in
      legislation is a slow one, but in several countries there is a move
      towards revising national policy on the control of risks from domestic
      radon exposure, with a shift from searching for homes with high radon
      concentrations and remediating them, to the introduction of radon
      preventive measures in large numbers of homes. For example, Finland,
      influenced by the south-west England study (reference [1] in section 3) as
      well as by its own national study, changed its building code in 2004 to
      require more effective radon preventive measures in new buildings; a
      survey conducted in 2009 revealed that these improved measures had
      resulted in a 33% lower average indoor radon concentration in new homes
      [F]. In Germany there is current discussion, motivated in part by the risk
      estimates from the European pooling study, on a move in this direction
      [G], and the UK is also considering changes in light of the cost-benefit
      study in the AGIR report.
    
ImpactSummary

    UCL research on statistical methodology has underpinned important
      investigations by scientists at Oxford University into the relationship
      between exposure to the naturally occurring radioactive gas radon and lung
      cancer. The resulting dose-response relationships and risk estimates have
      informed advice given in 2008-10 to the UK government by the Health
      Protection Agency about the risk of radon exposure and the
      cost-effectiveness of radon control policies. They have also influenced
      the conclusions of the World Health Organization about indoor radon and
      lung cancer, as reported in their 2009 handbook. Furthermore, the research
      findings have led to proposals for changes to building regulations in the
      UK and elsewhere, and changes to the building code in Finland have
      resulted in a reduction in the average indoor radon concentration in new
      homes.
    
UnderpinningResearch

    Evidence of an association between exposure to radon gas and increased
      rates of lung cancer has been available for over 100 years, but this early
      evidence was based on the exposure of uranium miners to very high doses of
      radon. However, people are also exposed to low doses of radon simply by
      living in their homes; granite &#8212; the underlying rock in many areas &#8212;
      contains low concentrations of the gas, which seeps up through the ground
      into buildings (the average concentration inside homes is 20 Bq m-3).
      It is therefore important to estimate the risk of lung cancer associated
      with these low doses, in order to judge whether and when preventive
      measures should be taken. In the past, this estimation was done by
      extrapolating from high to low doses of radon, but about 20 years ago
      advances in instrumentation for measuring radon concentrations in the home
      opened up the possibility of direct estimation of the risk of developing
      lung cancer due to domestic exposure. In the last 20 years, several
      countries have carried out case-control studies, in which lung cancer
      patients are matched with a control group and the radon exposure histories
      of both groups &#8212; obtained by retrospective measurements in the homes they
      have lived in &#8212; are compared and, in particular, are used to estimate a
      dose-response relationship. This requires adjustments for various other
      factors, of which smoking history is the most important.
    Since the early 1990s, Tom Fearn (Senior Lecturer 1989-96; Reader
      1996-99; Professor 1999-present) in UCL's Department of Statistical
      Science has worked closely with a group of scientists in the University of
      Oxford's Clinical Trials Support Unit (CTSU) on a number of studies
      relating to radon exposure. The CTSU group has been instrumental in
      carrying out a large case-control study in the south-west of England [1],
      and in pooling the results of 13 European case-control studies [2, 3].
      This latter exercise did not just combine the published risk estimates,
      but rather involved an analysis of the pooled data from all of the
      studies. Fearn's contribution to the work was in providing statistical
      methodology that underpinned the data analyses in the CTSU group's
      studies, as well as contributing to the data analysis.
    One relatively straightforward contribution from Fearn, with background
      and data provided by Sarah Darby at CTSU and Jon Miles at the National
      Radiological Protection Board, was a methodology [4] for applying a
      seasonal variation correction to domestic radon measurements, which are
      typically taken by placing a detector in the home for six months. This
      seasonal variation correction is important because summer measurements of
      internal radon concentrations are lower than winter ones (due to the
      release of radon to the outside through open windows), and so a six-month
      average is not an accurate estimate of the annual dose. The methodology
      developed at UCL involved smoothing and extrapolation with periodic
      functions, and was used to correct the dose measurements from the
      south-west England study [1] that was carried out between 1988 and 1998.
    A major difficulty in correctly estimating the dose-response relationship
      in case-control studies of radon and lung cancer is that there is very
      substantial measurement error in the radon measurements, with a typical
      coefficient of variation being 50%. It is well known that error in the
      x-variable flattens regressions, leading to slope estimates that are too
      low. Correcting for this effect is a simple matter for linear regression
      models; however, the model typically used to analyse these case-control
      studies is a logistic regression of case-control status on dose and
      covariates (such as smoking), fitted by maximum likelihood, for which the
      simple correction methods do not apply. In the analysis of the south-west
      England study [1], an approximate method by Cox and Reeves of Oxford
      University was used to make the correction. Fearn was closely involved in
      the implementation of this methodology; for example, advising on the
      estimation of measurement error variances in the situation where the
      exposure measurement is a sum over several homes with a proportion of
      missing data.
    For the European pooling study, on which work began in about 2003, this
      approximate method for correcting for the radon measurement error was
      considered to be inadequate. The main reason for this was the need to
      include study-specific adjustment for a substantial number of covariates.
      With large numbers of covariates maximum likelihood is biased, and it is
      preferable to implement the analysis using stratification and a
      conditional logistic likelihood, for which the Cox-Reeves approach does
      not work. Fearn therefore developed a new methodology based on numerically
      integrating the conditional logistic likelihood [5], with input on the
      context from Darby at CTSU and some computing assistance from David Hill
      at CTSU. This method is exact (if the distributional assumptions are
      correct), but computationally expensive, and was used in the data analysis
      reported in the European pooling study [2, 3].
    In the case-control [1] and European pooling [2, 3] studies it was found
      that appropriate correction for radon measurement error using the methods
      described above roughly doubled the estimate of the slope in the linear
      (for log odds) dose-response, i.e. the risk of developing lung cancer from
      exposure to radon was estimated to be twice as great as previously
      thought. This has important implications for policy decisions, where, for
      example, cost-benefit analyses of the value of remedial action in
      buildings need to be based on the correct estimates of risk. The two
      studies resulted in similar estimates of the risk of lung cancer from
      exposure to radon, but that from the pooled analysis has the advantage of
      being both much more precise and more appropriate for international use,
      because it was based on almost all the international data available at the
      time. The pooled analysis also found that there was no evidence of a dose
      threshold (i.e. a radon dose below which there is no effect), which also
      has important implications for public health policy since there is no dose
      that can be regarded as safe [2, 3]. A further important finding was that
      exposure to radon multiplies the risk of lung cancer from smoking, so that
      those who smoke &#8212; or who have smoked in the past &#8212; are at much higher
      absolute risk than lifelong non-smokers.
    Note that Fearn is not an author on references [2] and [3], despite
      contributing substantially to the data analysis, because of a
      two-per-study limit on authors (his contribution is instead acknowledged
      on page 53 of reference [2]). Please also note that although the
      methodology in reference [5] is described in detail in reference [2], the
      paper is not cited there because it was published later, the large time
      gap being due to differences in editorial practices between medical and
      statistical journals.
    