CaseStudyId: 30652
Title: 
    Improved decision making by the power sector and energy saving by
      consumers
    

ImpactDetails

    The research on wind resource estimation (project (a), above) has
      improved the understanding of
      wind power production estimates at the Norwegian power company Agder
      Energi, whose wind
      mast data were used in the research. The finding that missing wind speed
      data caused by frozen
      wind masts can introduce bias into wind power production estimates and
      profitability assessments,
      and the new method for imputing the missing data that was developed,
      raised awareness in the
      Wind &amp; Site division at Agder Energi in 2008 about the extent of the
      problem with missing data
      from wind measurements and the need to employ more suitable statistical
      methods for dealing with
      this problem than those that are currently used within the company [A].
    Specifically, the research made a two-fold direct contribution: (i)
      highlighted how Agder Energi's
      matrix approach is not as stable as their sectoral regression one in
      dealing with missing data; and
      (ii) developed a methodology to assess the economic impact of missing data
      both in terms of
      expected revenues and the distribution of revenues. Although these
      knowledge transfers cannot
      yet be quantified, they have provided valuable insights about the
      suitability of alternative
      approaches for correcting for missing data.
    DER-CAM (project (b), above) is enabling energy consumers to
      manage their energy resources
      better and minimise energy costs. It is also having an environmental
      impact since the use of
      energy resources is being managed more efficiently. DER-CAM has been
      deployed at sites
      including the Segundo Dining Commons building at the University of
      California at Davis (in 2011),
      the Santa Rita Jail in Alameda County, California (in 2012), and the
      Mechanical Engineering
      building at UNM (in 2012) [B].
    DER-CAM was installed at UNM to manage the operation of chilled water
      storage tanks and an
      absorption chiller powered by hot water from a solar array. The building
      required an automated
      procedure for forecasting cooling demand, scheduling optimal dispatch of
      the absorption chiller,
      and charging-discharging storage units optimally, operations which could
      not be handled by relying
      on simple rules of thumb or heuristics. The university reports that
      "DER-CAM proved to be the
      most effective solution" for managing their systems optimally and that the
      use of DER-CAM has
      resulted in tangible cost savings that are "especially significant over
      the shoulder season" [C].
      Thus, they are realising significant reductions in their energy bill by
      using solar power for cooling
      via storage in an automated way. UNM also benefits from the ease of use of
      DER-CAM; they
      informed us that "one of the principal advantages of using DER-CAM is
      that, once set up, it does
      not require user intervention to set system parameters" [C].
    UCL research has also improved knowledge and understanding of the power
      sector and options
      pricing among industry professionals and policymakers through the
      following knowledge transfer
      events:
    (1) Two ELDEV workshops, underpinned by the UCL research in project (a),
      above, in addition to
      other UCL research conducted as part of the ELDEV project, were held in
      Trondheim, Norway,
      during 2009 and 2010, and were attended by numerous power companies. For
      example, Agder
      Energi, Statkraft, and Tr&#248;nder Energi represented the Norwegian power
      sector, which faces issues
      about valuing renewables and transmission investment. Participants gained
      an improved
      understanding of the factors involved in making decisions under
      uncertainty, e.g., modelling energy
      prices, hedging risk exposure via financial and physical positions, and
      investment appraisal. In
      addition, their increased awareness of the issues raised by the ELDEV
      project stimulated industrial
      companies in Norway to co-fund subsequent research projects. For example,
      ELCARBONRISK
      (2010-2014, NOK 13.5 million with participation of power companies Eidsiva
      Energi and Tafjord
      Karft) and PURELEC (2011-2014, NOK 8.5 million with involvement of power
      companies NTE and
      SAE Vind) are both focusing more on modelling energy prices and analysing
      investment in
      renewables, two issues that were highlighted in ELDEV.
    (2) Two workshops sponsored by the UK Energy Research Centre (UKERC) in
      2008 and 2009 on
      financial methods, underpinned by the UCL research in references [4] and
      [5] in project (c), have
      transferred knowledge from UCL academics to industry and policymakers. The
      2008 workshop had
      around 35 attendees, including representatives from power companies
      (including EDF Energy),
      consulting firms and ministries (including the Ministry of Energy, Mexico)
      [D]. The 2009 UKERC
      workshop was hosted by the Department of Energy and Climate Change (DECC)
      with about fifty
      participants. This exchange allowed UK policymakers to gain a better
      understanding of the benefits
      and limitations of using financial methods. Furthermore, the 2009 workshop
      counted as part of
      DECC's economics training for the year.
    (3) The findings of the optionality research conducted in project (c),
      above, during the "An Options
      Approach to UK Energy Futures" project were disseminated to the public and
      private sector via two
      events held at the LBS: "Decision Analysis and Real Options for Energy"
      (24 April 2012) and
      "Climate Policy, Risk and Energy Investment" (2-3 May 2012). The knowledge
      transfer facilitated
      by these events, which had around 20 and 80 attendees respectively, has
      enabled companies
      active in the power sector to advise managers and clients better about
      financial fundamentals and
      the propagation of risk. An attendee (of both events), from the PR firm
      Ketchum, reported that "The
      workshop really helped us to understand the energy market dynamics and
      investment options
      much better, including the risks and inherent optionality involved in
      capex-related corporate
      decision-making process" and that "For us as communication consultants,
      this knowledge and
      increased understanding of the underlining financial and business
      fundamentals of the energy
      infrastructure investment has enabled us to advise our clients much better
      in terms of both the
      corporate positioning and strategic communications &#8212; especially given the
      challenging and rather
      uncertain operating environment" [E].
    
ImpactSummary

    Financial engineering and optimisation provide both power companies and
      consumers with better
      decision support in deregulated energy sectors. UCL research has delivered
      the following benefits
      to decision makers: (i) a clearer understanding of the role of statistical
      analysis in imputing missing
      data on wind speeds and (ii) reduction in energy costs by optimised
      scheduling of energy
      technologies. Other benefits have been (i) investment in follow-up
      research projects by industrial
      companies and (ii) knowledge transfer via workshops.
    
UnderpinningResearch

    Since 2005, UCL's Department of Statistical Science has been involved
      with three research
      projects that have addressed real-world problems: (a) ELDEV
      (funded by the Mid-Norway
      Business Research Fund) focused on using financial engineering to improve
      business practices at
      power companies; (b) The Distributed Energy Resources Customer
      Adoption Model, or DER-CAM,
      (funded by the US Department of Energy and the California Energy
      Commission) used
      optimisation to devise investment and operational strategies for users of
      small-scale on-site power
      generation; and (c) "An Options Approach to UK Energy Futures"
      (funded by the Natural
      Environment Research Council) took a more qualitative perspective to
      illustrate the consequences
      for UK energy policy of incorporating real options, i.e., managerial
      discretion over investment
      timing/sizing or technology choice. Thus, all problems have directly
      addressed real-world decision
      making in deregulated energy sectors in Norway, the US, and the UK.
    (a) To assess the likely generating capacities of wind farms at
      promising sites, power companies
      use anemometers to measure the wind speed at those locations. However,
      these instruments tend
      to freeze in the winter, resulting in the systematic loss of data. Since
      wind speeds are highest in
      the winter, ignoring these missing data or using a na&#239;ve correction
      adversely affects the value of
      new wind farms. A new methodology to correct for missing wind speed data
      from anemometers
      was developed during 2008 and 2009 by UCL researcher Afzal Siddiqui
      (Lecturer in Statistics
      2005-2010; Senior Lecturer 2010-present) together with Agder Energi
      employee Klaus-Ole
      Vogstad [1]. This work was conducted as part of the ELDEV project.
    The seasonality-based approach that was developed is novel in that it
      preserves the
      autocorrelation structure of wind speeds and directions while modelling
      electricity prices accurately
      via a mean-reverting jump-diffusion (MRJD) process. Using artificially
      removed data from the
      Geitvassfjellet site, the researchers demonstrated that the proposed
      methodology is able to restore
      accurately the probability density function of the annual revenues from a
      proposed wind turbine [1].
      UCL's specific contribution was in the form of stochastic models for
      electricity prices and a
      statistical procedure for imputing wind speeds.
    (b) Greater deregulation of the energy sector is likely to lead to
      more decentralised decision
      making by energy producers and consumers alike. While large power
      companies have the
      resources to manage such a transition, consumers often lack the expertise
      in optimisation and
      computation to do so. DER-CAM has been developed to help consumers with
      this problem; it
      enables them to minimise emissions or the cost of operating their energy
      system by assessing
      their energy profile, prevailing market information, and information on
      their distributed energy
      resources technology. A large number of resources (both for energy
      production and storage) can
      be handled, as well as flexible demand and details of building
      thermodynamics. DER-CAM can
      determine which on-site power generation and combined heat and power
      systems a user should
      install, and how and when they should be operated in order to minimise
      energy bills.
    DER-CAM has been developed jointly by Siddiqui and researchers from
      Berkeley Lab since 2000.
      Since joining UCL in 2005, Siddiqui has made significant mathematical
      contributions to the current
      version of DER-CAM, including the incorporation of complex thermodynamic
      constraints [2]. This
      improvement to DER-CAM was implemented so that the University of New
      Mexico (UNM) could
      use the model to optimise their cooling equipment scheduling.
    (c) Most models used for energy policy assume perfect foresight
      and price-taking behaviour by
      decision makers. The work in the "An Options Approach to UK Energy
      Futures" project &#8212; conducted
      by Siddiqui together with Derek Bunn and Michail Chronopoulos from the
      London
      Business School (LBS) &#8212; showed that, in contrast to this assumption,
      managerial discretion over
      investment timing/sizing or technology choice is actually affected by
      uncertainty and imperfect
      competition.
    The project, conducted during 2011 and 2012, involved the development of
      a high-level framework
      for illustrating the principal features of optionality in the energy
      sector. In particular, the theory of
      real options was used to illustrate how uncertainty, competition, and
      power companies' flexibility to
      delay investment decisions lead to vastly different outcomes than those
      predicted by traditional
      models [3]. This finding indicates that policymakers need to adjust how
      their support schemes or
      market designs are implemented. Taking a UK example, it was shown how a CO2
      price floor would
      subvert the incentive of a fossil-fuel power plant to be the industry
      leader by removing the
      operational flexibility that makes it preferable to a renewable-energy
      plant. UCL's specific
      contribution was in Siddiqui's review of real options models to showcase
      their policy relevance,
      assistance with positioning the paper, delivery of tutorials on options
      pricing, and numerous
      presentations.
    Much of the theoretical background to this project, concerning the value
      of flexibility and strategic
      interactions, was conducted by Siddiqui working with Stein-Erik Fleten
      from the Norwegian
      University of Science and Technology [4] and Ryuta Takashima from the
      Chiba Institute of
      Technology [5]. UCL's contribution was central: in both papers, Siddiqui
      formulated the problem,
      solved the models numerically where necessary, and formalised the
      analytical propositions.
      Siddiqui and Fleten [4] examined mutually exclusive investment
      opportunities in either a readily
      available renewable energy technology or a more ambitious one that needs
      further R&amp;D to bring
      down its cost for subsequent commercialisation. The main result was a
      valuation of the option to
      conduct R&amp;D in the ambitious technology. Surprisingly, it was found
      that a high level of uncertainty
      in the electricity price reduced this option value as long as the learning
      rate was low because
      higher expected prices made even a rudimentary ambitious technology
      attractive. Siddiqui and
      Takashima [5] took a strategic real options approach to investigate how
      staged investment under
      uncertainty is affected by the presence of a rival. Such discretion over
      not only investment timing
      but also modularity is a hallmark of most infrastructure industries
      including energy and
      telecommunications. It was found that a modular investment strategy is
      worth relatively more to a
      duopolist than to a monopolist because the former is partially able to
      offset the loss in market
      share. Moreover, it was also shown analytically that a duopolist's
      disadvantage relative to a
      monopolist worsens as volatility increases only if its loss in market
      share from the entrance of a
      rival is relatively high.
    