CaseStudyId: 31109
Title: 
    A new approach to urban street planning and design
    

ImpactDetails

    Use in national guidance documents: The 2010 publication `Manual
      for Streets 2, wider application of the principles' [c], which carried
      ministerial endorsement, looked at the application of Link and Place
      principles to busier urban streets, and made reference to Link and Place
      applications. (This publication built on the influential national guidance
      document on street design: `Manual for Streets' [Department for Transport
      and Communities and Local Government, 2007] which incorporated the basic
      principles of Link and Place.) Link and Place applications are also
      included in the Irish Department of Transport, Tourism and Sport's 2013
      `Design manual for urban roads and streets', and in street design guidance
      for the South Australia government, which has been used to improve street
      design in SA urban areas.
    Applications by local authorities and regional government: Jones'
      invited presentations on Link and Place and its potential uses has
      informed practitioners in the UK and abroad (including Hungary,
      Switzerland, China, New Zealand, Australia and the USA) and has led to
      several practical applications by consultants and local authorities. These
      include:
    
      West Midlands Red Route team, used in a series of corridor studies
        between 2009 and 2011
      Belgravia and Mayfair (by the MVA Consultancy); used to assess street
        function and appropriate design solutions in a study funded by the
        Grosvenor Estate and Westminster City Council in 2008 [g].
      Staffordshire County Council, as part of a county strategic assessment
        in 2012
      Galway City Council (by Taylor Young), as part of a strategic review
        of street network functioning in 2010 [d].
      South Australian Government, as part of a Transport and Public Health
        strategy in 2012 [a].
      Smart Move Adelaide, the city's 10-year transport and movement
        strategy, in 2012 [b].
      The Beijing Municipal Institute of City Planning and Design
        incorporated the approach into draft regulations for urban road space in
        2013 (due to come into force in 2014) [m], following the publication of
        the main 2007 Link and Place report in Chinese in 2012 [e].
      East Staffordshire Borough Council's Town Centre Public Realm
        Implementation Plan for Burton-on-Trent, published in July 2012 [h], was
        informed by the methodology and offered a transparent, structured way of
        defining the street hierarchy and is used by the local authority to
        inform their strategy and spending on street and public realm
        improvements (up to &#163;1m a year). It is also used to inform the guidance
        the council gives to developers as to what they are expected to provide
        in the public realm, and to what standard, as part of their proposals.
        [j]
    
    Major UK applications: The first of these, in the London Borough
      of Hounslow, was as part of an &#163;650m private finance initiative (PFI) to
      upgrade and maintain the borough's highway network over a 25-year period,
      starting in early 2013. The local authority needed a transparent method to
      define standards for highway reconstruction and maintenance, which would
      be objective and responsive to changing circumstances. The criteria for
      allocating a particular Link and Place status to each street segment is
      set out in the PFI contract, so that if circumstances change over the
      25-year period, then the status of the relevant street segments will be
      reassessed, and the maintenance standards adjusted, if necessary. There
      was a national competition among local authorities to obtain PFI funding,
      and this novel application of Link and Place was reported by the Council
      as being one reason why Hounslow was successful in its bid for DfT and
      Treasury funding [l]. The council confirmed that its first targets had
      been met: as of 30 June 2013, 432km of streets and footways had been
      rehabilitated (15.4% of the total); 7.5% of street lighting replaced with
      LED and centralised control; and 8 bridges restored to meet load-carrying
      requirements [l].
    The second application is in relation to a new strategic assessment of
      the future role of the London road network, initiated by the Mayor of
      London in autumn 2012. Jones worked on an independent Roads Task Force,
      comprising stakeholders representing different transport mode and business
      interests, plus NGOs and local authorities, to use a modified version of
      the Link and Place approach (in the form of a family of `street types'
      based around `Moving and Place' street functions), recognising that there
      is a diverse range of streets which perform different functions, and that
      priorities and appropriate design solutions will therefore vary across the
      network. TfL has said this allowed for a much more sophisticated approach
      to analysing and planning investment than the traditional road user
      hierarchy [k]. The RTF report was published in July 2013, with the `Moving
      and Place' classification of streets being a core element [f]. It was
      warmly welcomed by a broad range of stakeholders, including the London
      boroughs [k]. TfL now requires that boroughs use this street
      classification when submitting funding bids for new schemes to TfL, though
      the LIP (Local Implementation Plan) process. The director of London
      Councils, which represents London's boroughs, confirms that the approach
      is already being used, with a &#163;3m scheme to upgrade the street environment
      in Hornchurch completed in June 2013. In Bexleyheath, the balance between
      competing needs has been recognised in the planning process. [k]
    Public engagement in street planning: Jones recognised the
      potential of the broader formulation of streets as providing a basis for
      carrying out more effective and consensual public engagement activities,
      since it explicitly recognises the legitimate interests of all street
      users groups, not simply motor vehicle drivers. In 2007-08, the street
      design toolkit he developed in the DISTILLATE project was applied in two
      exercises in the West Midlands (Bloxwich and Coventry), where the public
      had strongly objected to design proposals put forward by the local
      councils, which were then withdrawn. In both cases, new designs were
      generated by local stakeholders that were subsequently implemented with
      high levels of public and business support, and minimal objection [see
      outputs 8 and 4, pp. 250-252]. In 2008 Walsall Council commissioned UCL to
      provide two sets of the toolkit for their own use, in subsequent complex
      street design contexts.
    Provision of training to urban planners: Jones has been invited to
      run various training events to explain the principles of Link and Place
      and its derivations to urban planners. In 2013 this has included sessions
      for Urban Design London (with 80+ London borough representatives, TfL
      staff and consultants in attendance), and as part of a training programme
      for engineers and planners from the UAE, organised by PTRC &#8212; the training
      arm of the Chartered Institute of Logistics and Transport.
    
ImpactSummary

    Peter Jones' research developed new principles for urban street planning
      and design, which have been incorporated into Department for Transport
      (DfT) and Department for Communities and Local Government (DCLG) national
      guidelines. The methodology has been used in the Mayor of London's Roads
      Task Force report; Transport for London (TfL) now requires boroughs to use
      the classification for all new submissions for funding for street schemes.
      It underpins the specification of an &#163;650m PFI highway maintenance
      contract with LB Hounslow, and has been used by other UK local
      authorities. Internationally, the approach has been applied in Australia
      and included in draft regulations for urban planning in Beijing.
    
UnderpinningResearch

    Research by Professor Peter Jones (Professor of Transport and Sustainable
      Development at UCL since 2005) has looked in detail at the design and
      operation of urban streets, using video surveys and collecting data on
      selected objective and subjective performance measures in a number of case
      studies. This found that urban street design has been dominated by meeting
      the needs of motorised vehicles, with consequential poor physical street
      environments that negatively impacted on local economic, social and
      cultural activity, and has resulted in unattractive public spaces. The
      underlying problem was identified as being due to the classification of
      streets purely in terms of their traffic movement functions, thereby
      ignoring other street user needs. To address this problem, he developed a
      comprehensive basis for identifying and classifying the various functions
      of different types of urban streets, recognising that urban streets
      accommodate a wide range of movement and non-movement activities. The
      research replaces the one-dimensional vehicle-based street classification
      with a two-dimensional classification, based on their `Link' (movement by
      all modes of transport) and `Place' (living) functions, and develops a
      comprehensive set of operational, planning, design and appraisal
      procedures that build on these principles. Link requirements are defined
      in terms of the movement needs of all street users (including
      pedestrians), while Place requirements describe the various economic,
      social and cultural activities that are to be planned for on and adjacent
      to the street.
    Some of the initial conceptual thinking emerged from the EU-funded
      ARTISTS project (2002 to 2005), involving academics, consultants and city
      authorities from several European countries, which looked at how urban
      streets could contribute to more sustainable urban communities. After he
      moved to UCL in 2005, Jones, together with Dr Stephen Marshall (Reader in
      Urban Morphology and Planning, at UCL since 2000) developed this abstract
      thinking into a practical street classification system that was trialled
      on the Transport for London Road Network (TLRN). A set of planning and
      design procedures was developed through research and case study
      applications in London largely funded by Transport for London. In 2007,
      Jones and Marshall published the detailed guide Link and Place: A
        guide to street planning and design [1], which was endorsed by
      Transport for London and the Chartered Institution of Highways and
      Transportation. Natalya Boujenko, a co-author in this publication, worked
      for Transport for London, and led the field trials.
    The Link and Place procedures developed through this research [2,3,5-7]
      include:
    
       Defining requirements for highway construction and maintenance in
        urban areas, with the Link status determining the carriageway provision,
        and the Place status the provision and maintenance of the footway and
        street furniture, plus the street-cleansing regime.
       Measuring street performance in a comprehensive way that takes full
        account of the range of street functions.
       Determining the acceptability of the current performance of a street
        segment, by benchmarking this against appropriate regulatory
        requirements or comparative levels of performance &#8212; recognising that
        `acceptable performance' may vary with Link and Place status levels.
       Prioritising segments of the street network for improvement, based on
        shortfalls in current performance and status levels.
       Comprehensively assessing street design requirements, through
        detailed consideration of street activities and their space/capacity
        requirements, at desirable and minimum levels of provision.
       Identifying design objectives and constraints, and formulating these
        in the preparation of a comprehensive Design Brief.
       Developing a set of design options that meet the requirements set out
        in the Design Brief, with stakeholder involvement; and
       Appraising design options, in terms of their contribution to
        addressing the measured shortfalls in street performance, in a
        cost-effective manner.
    
    For design purposes, the approach defines more precisely sets of user
      needs and identifies ways in which they might be met through providing
      different `street design elements'; it moves away from the notion of a
      fixed `road user hierarchy', recognising that priorities vary according to
      the type of street, and it provided guidelines on how to prioritise among
      competing user needs in different situations. It has proved particularly
      successful in engaging stakeholders in street design where space use is
      contested, bringing together the resident and business communities,
      alongside local politicians, transport planners, traffic engineers, land
      use planners and urban designers.
    Between 2005 and 2008, Jones participated in the EPSRC-funded DISTILLATE
      project (co-ordinated through Leeds University), which developed a range
      of new decision support tools for local transport planning. As part of
      this, he developed a street design toolkit to help in generating
      acceptable streetscape design solutions in contentious situations [4, 8].
    