CaseStudyId: 31110
Title: 
    Improving aircraft safety in icing conditions
    

ImpactDetails

    Aircraft icing consultancy company AeroTex was founded in 2002, as an SME
      offshoot from QinetiQ. Since 2008, it has used UCL's research to underpin
      its specialist icing work, ranging from ice accretion physics to the
      design and certification of ice protection systems [A].
    In 2010, the United States Federal Aviation Administration (FAA) proposed
      new aircraft icing regulations. The European Aviation Safety Agency (EASA)
      followed suit in 2011, proposing a similar update to their certification
      specifications for large aeroplanes. Since then, aircraft manufacturers
      have been working to ensure their designs meet these specifications, as
      the proposals will come into force imminently.
    These proposals followed a number of accidents, including the October
      1994 crash of American Eagle Flight 4184, which rolled out of level flight
      and crashed into a field in Indiana, killing all 68 people on board.
      Investigations found that the accident was caused by a build-up of ice on
      the wings during icing conditions that included freezing rain, or
      supercooled large droplets (SLD). At the time, the FAA required aircraft
      to be tested and certified for flight in icing conditions, but the rules
      were aimed at much smaller cloud-droplet diameters. The importance of
      SLDs, and their significant splash effects, was unknown, and was not even
      considered when certifying aircraft. Accidents including Flight 4184 and
      many since then highlighted the inadequacy of the icing certification
      standards and led to lengthy, complex discussions between authorities,
      manufacturers and designers about introducing updated regulations, and how
      these would be prepared for. This then resulted in the FAA introducing its
      proposals for new regulations that include SLD and ice crystals.
    In 2002, the UCL group was asked by industry to conduct research into
      SLD. UCL's research described in section 2 helps AeroTex to design new ice
      protection systems that meet these regulatory requirements [A]. It also
      impacts upon AeroTex's customers by enabling them to operate aircraft more
      safely in icing conditions and to comply with improved safety legislation.
      The research came to influence AeroTex through research collaborations,
      including Research Associate placements, and meetings of the UK Icing
      Group, of which UCL and AeroTex are both members. The owner of AeroTex
      said: "We have been able to use the knowledge generated within our
      analysis phase so that there has certainly been a benefit to us. We flow
      the knowledge generated by UCL into designs for ice protection systems for
      commercial customers" [B].
    AeroTex makes use of UCL research when advising customers on whether ice
      protection is needed and when designing new ice protection systems that
      comply with future and current regulations. The UCL research findings are
      an important part of a portfolio of methods and evidence used to make
      decisions, and have directly influenced the course of development of
      AeroTex's AID (Aircraft Icing Design) analysis tool, used in aircraft ice
      protection system design. UCL research also helps AeroTex to stay ahead of
      their competitive rivals; the company has become experienced at providing
      consultancy for manufacturers who need to conform to the new certification
      rules [A].
    UCL's research has not only led to these important impacts on aircraft
      safety, but also has commercial benefits for AeroTex. [text removed for
      publication]
    AeroTex's customers are confidential, but include several aircraft
      manufacturers and Tier 1 (the top approved) equipment suppliers. New
      sub-system designs have already been or are to be incorporated into
      manufactured aircraft, and are estimated to be included on thousands of
      aircraft over many years. UCL research has helped both AeroTex and their
      customers to understand the effects of ice on planes, and the safety
      implications associated with icing. It has helped AeroTex provide system
      designs that comply with proposed new rules, and enabled them to compete
      effectively against their rivals, supporting improved aircraft safety for
      the future. The financial figures as far as the customers are concerned
      are confidential but extend into the hundreds of thousands of pounds
      sterling.
    
ImpactSummary

    The consultancy company AeroTex makes use of UCL research findings to
      design new and improved ice protection systems for fixed wing or rotor
      aircraft. These new designs enable AeroTex's customers (aircraft
      manufacturers and Tier 1 equipment suppliers) to comply with upcoming
      changes that are raising aircraft certification standards and to operate
      aircraft more safely in icing conditions. The increase in income to
      AeroTex resulting from this work was approximately [text removed for
      publication] per year between 2010 and 2013, representing around 15% of
      AeroTex's annual turnover.
    
UnderpinningResearch

    When an aircraft flies through cloud at or below freezing temperature,
      ice can accrete on its forward-facing parts. This can lead to detrimental
      performance, and has been a significant factor in a number of past
      incidents and accidents, some of which resulted in the loss of life. Icing
      occurs when supercooled water droplets suspended in the cloud impact on
      the body of the aircraft and freeze on to it. The rate, amount and
      location of ice accretion depend on parameters including temperature,
      speed, aircraft surface shape and droplet size. Existing mathematical
      models are reasonably accurate in predicting the shape and quantity of ice
      produced when droplets are small (&#8804;40&#956;m). However, for
      larger droplets (supercooled large droplets, or SLD) the models were
      inadequate and tended to dramatically over-predict the amount of ice
      produced and wrongly predict its location, partly because larger droplets
      tend to splash. This resulted in errors in predicting aerodynamic
      performance and safety.
    Accurate modelling of aircraft icing is desirable as it can inform the
      design of aircraft and ice protection systems, resulting in improved
      aircraft safety. Between 2001 and 2013 researchers in UCL's Department of
      Mathematics investigated and modelled various aspects of impacts of
      relevance to aircraft icing, taking larger droplets into account and
      ensuring that models are realistic. Work on asymptotic expansions and
      matching, involving complex multi-phase fluids, irregular geometry,
      air-water interactions, shallow-layer impacts and ice-skimming, produced
      reduced-equation computations and code supported by comparisons with
      real-world findings.
    Early work (2001-03) involved the development of models that simulate how
      a layer of air between a droplet and a water layer affects the impact of
      the droplet [1]; the effect of air on impacts &#8212; vital for real-world
      applications &#8212; had never been predicted before. Splashing of large
      droplets impacting onto a layer of water was then investigated in 2002 to
      2005 [2, 3], with parameters such as air flow, water depth and droplet
      size being varied. Findings included the first-ever predictions of surface
      roughness effects after impact and how much of the water layer is splashed
      away. Some of this work [3] was written up jointly with a group from the
      Mathematical Institute in Oxford, the University of Nottingham and the
      University of East Anglia, who had arrived simultaneously at the same
      research conclusions. This work was followed in 2006 to 2008 by modelling
      of impacts involving a solid body approaching another solid body with two
      fluids (air and water) between them [4]; in an aircraft icing scenario
      this corresponds to an ice crystal impacting upon a solid aircraft surface
      covered by a water layer.
    A related research strand (2008-13) involved skimming impacts and
      rebounds. A model was derived for a solid body (e.g. an ice crystal)
      undergoing an oblique skimming impact with a shallow liquid layer and then
      rebounding from it [5]; this work included explanations of both entries
      into and exits from water. An extension of this model included fluid-body
      interactions with multiple bodies and multiple impacts [6], of relevance
      to wind-blown ice particles travelling along an aircraft wing.
    The above research generated new and simpler computational methodology.
      It also provided flexible mathematical predictions of the precise extent
      of a splash, rebound duration, effects of surrounding air motion, and
      shapes resulting from ice accretion or melting, which take into account
      highly variable parameter values including droplet size, impact speed and
      angle of incidence.
    Site visits and discussions with QinetiQ and AeroTex, together with
      complementary experimental input from Cranfield University, were important
      for much of the above modelling work [1, 2, 3, 4].
    Key UCL researchers: Frank Smith (Professor in Mathematics),
      Richard Purvis (PDRA 2002-05), Andrew Ellis (PDRA 2006-08) and Peter Hicks
      (PDRA 2010-11).
    