CaseStudyId: 31380
Title: 
    Informing national and international influenza vaccination policy
    

ImpactDetails

    Vaccination of healthcare workers
    Hayward's DH Policy Research Programme research on vaccination of
      healthcare workers against influenza in nursing homes and acute care
      settings has led to national recommendations to immunise staff in nursing
      homes and other social care settings [a] and is one of the main
      streams of evidence supporting vaccination of healthcare workers against
      influenza. Annual campaigns to increase uptake of the vaccination amongst
      NHS staff have cited the publication for many years. (See, for example,
      the current year's letter from the Chief Medical Officer [b].) The
      evidence on low uptake contributed to DH decisions to set up mandatory
      routine monitoring of influenza vaccine uptake in England and informs the
      content of the DH "Flu Fighters" campaign (launched in 2010/11) aimed at
      increasing uptake amongst front line healthcare staff including protection
      of patients, safety and effectiveness as key messages. This has led to a
      range of local NHS trust campaigns [c]. Since the publication of
      our research, healthcare worker vaccination in acute trusts in England has
      increased from a steady low of around 15% to around 45% in the 2010/11
      season [d].
    Internationally, the trial is cited in annual US guidance on healthcare
      worker vaccination [e] and has also contributed to 27 States in
      the US making healthcare worker influenza vaccination mandatory [f].
      Our work was presented as key evidence in a 2013 test-case trial in Canada
      on mandatory vaccination [g].
    Informing US recommendations of prevention of stroke
    Our systematic review and meta-analysis of the influence of influenza as
      a trigger for acute vascular events was the first of its kind. It is now
      cited in American Heart Association/American Stroke Association guidance
      for prevention of stroke, recommending influenza vaccine for all those at
      raised risk of stroke [h].
    Routine vaccination of children
    Our work has also impacted on the recent recommendation by the Joint
      Committee on Vaccination and Immunisation (JCVI) of routine vaccination of
      all children against influenza every year and the decision not to
      recommend extension of vaccination to all adults aged over 50 years. This
      decision was largely based on the findings of a dynamic transmission
      model, commissioned by the DH and conducted by LSHTM and HPA, to assess
      the effectiveness and cost effectiveness of the national influenza
      vaccination campaign and consider options for extending this to other
      groups. The model predicted that 30% coverage in children would result in
      net savings of around &#163;65m and prevent loss of around 17,000 Quality
      Adjusted Life Years annually. The model also suggested that extending
      vaccination to all those aged greater than 50 years would not be cost
      effective [i].
    In order to increase confidence in the findings of the economic model the
      committee requested that the age specific baseline levels of infection and
      disease inferred by the model be validated against Flu Watch data
      (provided prior to publication) to check that the model provided an
      accurate representation of the true community burden. The fact that model
      output and the empirical measures from Flu Watch matched gave confidence
      in the validity of the model and thus supported the recommendation to
      extend routine influenza vaccination to children but not to all adults
      aged over 50. In deliberating on the type of vaccine to be used the Flu
      Watch finding that cellular immune responses provide protection against
      both seasonal and pandemic disease was discussed and contributed to the
      decision to use Live Attenuated Influenza Vaccine (which stimulates both
      cellular and humoral immunity) rather than Trivalent Inactivated Vaccine
      (which only stimulates humoral immunity) [j]. The childhood
      vaccination campaign is being launched in test regions in 2013.
    
ImpactSummary

    Research undertaken at UCL's Centre for Infectious Disease Epidemiology
      has provided evidence about vaccination of different groups against
      influenza which have influenced policy and practice. In particular, our
      work underpins the government's ongoing policy on vaccination of
      healthcare workers, and is cited every year in the Chief Medical Officer's
      letter to healthcare workers as well as international recommendations on
      influenza vaccination of healthcare workers, including widespread
      mandatory vaccination programmes in North America. Research on influenza
      and acute cardiovascular events has informed US recommendations for
      prevention of stroke through vaccination. Recent work also informed the
      decision in the UK to extend regular influenza vaccination to children.
    
UnderpinningResearch

    Research led by Dr Andrew Hayward at UCL's Centre for Infectious Disease
      Epidemiology, in collaboration with others at Southampton University, the
      London School of Hygiene &amp; Tropical Medicine (LSHTM) and the Health
      Protection Agency (HPA), has informed national influenza vaccination and
      control policy.
    Between 2003 and 2005, Hayward designed and led a seminal cluster
      randomised controlled trial, funded by the Department of Health (DH) to
      encourage influenza vaccination of staff in 44 nursing homes [1].
      The study, which involved more than 1,700 healthcare workers and 2,600
      residents, showed a significant decrease in patient mortality,
      Influenza-like illness (ILI), consultations for ILI with general
      practitioners, and ILI hospitalizations during a moderate influenza season
      among residents of homes in the healthcare worker vaccination arm,
      compared with those residing in control facilities. This provided clear
      evidence in favour of vaccinating healthcare workers, which is continually
      cited in key communications and international recommendations on this
      topic.
    Hayward was also part of the team that conducting the only national study
      of influenza vaccine attitudes amongst NHS staff [2, 3]. This
      DH-funded study among 6,302 NHS staff showed that 19% of responders had
      taken up influenza immunisation during winter 2002/3. Amongst those
      vaccinated, the majority who accepted vaccination (66%) were most strongly
      influenced by the personal benefits of protection against influenza.
      Prevention of sickness absence and protection of patients were the prime
      motivation for only 10% and 7% of subjects, respectively. Among 3,967 who
      declined vaccination, the most common primary demotivators were concern
      about safety (31%) and efficacy (29%). 22% were most strongly deterred by
      lack of time to attend for vaccination. Free text answers indicated that
      37% declined because of a perceived low ratio of personal benefits to
      adverse effects. Subjects said they would be persuaded to take up
      vaccination in future by easier access (36%), more information about
      personal benefit and risk (34%) and more information about effects on
      staff absence (24%).
    Hayward is lead author in a systematic review and meta-analysis of the
      impact of influenza on triggering acute cardiovascular events showing this
      is an important preventable risk factor [4].
    Since 2006, Hayward has led the MRC/Wellcome Flu Watch study, the world's
      largest community study of influenza transmission and immunity. This study
      recruited households across England to monitor levels of illness over five
      flu seasons, via serological testing of pre- and post-season blood
      samples, weekly follow up to record any flu-like illness, and nasal swabs
      for those who reported such illness. The main results, which are under
      review by the Lancet, provide the most robust measures to date of
      influenza burden across different age groups and highlight the
      particularly high rates in children [5]. Further results showed
      the importance of T-cell mediated immunity in protecting against seasonal
      and pandemic influenza.
    