CaseStudyId: 31381
Title: 
    Improving control of tuberculosis in hard-to-reach groups
    

ImpactDetails

    London is now the `TB capital' of Europe and has more cases annually than
      the Netherlands,
      Belgium, Greece and Norway combined. TB is curable in virtually all cases
      and can be effectively
      controlled provided cases are found early and patients can complete
      treatment. The research
      described above has resulted in new services to improve control of
      tuberculosis in hard-to-reach
      groups.
    The Find&amp;Treat Project
    The original TB profile study provided justification for London Region to
      invest in a large
      demonstration project of mobile X-ray screening in homeless people, drug
      users and prisoners.
      Our initial evaluation of the demonstration project led the Department of
      Health (DH) to invest in
      continued funding of mobile X-ray screening in homeless shelters and drug
      services and the
      expansion of the service to include workers to support patients through
      diagnosis and treatment.
      This has now become the Find&amp;Treat service &#8212; a specialist outreach
      team that works alongside
      over 200 NHS and third sector front-line services to tackle TB among
      homeless people, drug or
      alcohol users, vulnerable migrants and people who have been in prison. The
      multidisciplinary
      Find&amp;Treat team takes TB control into the community, finds cases of
      active TB early and supports
      patients to take a full course of treatment and get cured. The service
      spans the TB pathway from
      detection, to diagnosis and onward care. To `Find' TB cases early the team
      raises awareness
      among service users and frontline professionals and screen almost 10,000
      high risk people every
      year using a mobile digital X-ray unit (MXU) as recommended by the
      National Institute of Health
      and Clinical Excellence (NICE). The screening service covers every London
      Borough and supports
      Public Health England (PHE) to manage outbreaks of TB nationally. Our
      subsequent evaluation of
      the expanded service contributed to decisions for NHS to take over the
      funding of the service
      which is now hosted by UCLH on behalf of London [a].
    Analysis of service data shows that between January 2008 and June 2013,
      Find&amp;Treat undertook
      45,385 X-rays leading to 385 referrals, 84 of which resulted in treatment
      being commenced for
      pulmonary tuberculosis (detection rate 247 per 100,000 individuals
      screened). 84% successfully
      completed treatment within 12 months (higher than the proportion of cases
      who complete TB
      treatment nationally). Since 2008 Find&amp;Treat have worked with 1,379
      suspected and active TB
      cases including 780 cases with active TB (696 referred from TB and allied
      services in London and
      Birmingham and 84 found on the MXU). Of the culture confirmed cases 33%
      were drug resistant
      including 59 multidrug-resistant (MDR) and 4 extensively drug-resistant
      (XDR) cases. 371 of the
      referrals to Find&amp;Treat were because of loss to follow up and deemed
      un-contactable by local
      services. The outreach team recontacted 74% (275) of whom 73% have
      completed treatment (154)
      or are well established and expected to complete treatment (46). The team
      also support Directly
      Observed Therapy (where a responsible adult watches every dose of
      treatment being swallowed to
      improve adherence) and have pioneered the use of Video Observed Therapy
      (VOT) using laptops
      and smartphones. VOT is now being evaluated as part of a randomised trial
      funded within the
      UCL-led TB Reach NIHR Programme grant [b].
    Public Health England is now developing a project to expand the service
      nationally, creating a
      National Infection &amp; Inequality System (NIIS) to provide integrated
      testing, treatment, health and
      social care for vulnerable populations disproportionately affected by
      serious public health
      infections, in particular TB, Hepatitis C and HIV. This service will be
      directly modelled on the
      successful model of Find&amp;Treat [c].
    Introduction of static screening in prisons
    Our research demonstrated that turnover of prisoners was too high for a
      mobile unit to provide
      sufficient coverage to pick up cases and recommended the installation of
      static digital X-ray units
      (DXR) in key prisons. In March 2008, the Chief Medical Officer announced
      the intention of DH to
      fund the installation of static DXR machines in five London prisons at a
      cost of &#163;10m. This decision
      was explicitly linked by the CMO to our MXU evaluation project (ref 5
      above) [d]. The X-ray units
      were all installed and in operation by March 2012. PHE's Director of
      Health and Justice reports that
      "I have no doubt that the MXU project has had a direct and positive
        influence on policy and
        programmes relating to active case finding for pulmonary TB among people
        in prisons and other
        places of detention." A new national partnership agreement just
      signed between PHE, NHS
      England and the National Offender Management Service (NOMS) has made
      further commitments
      to ensuring the service is fully utilised, and furthermore, following a
      successful trial of the
      Find&amp;Treat service at a large Immigration Removal Centre (IRC) near
      London, proposals are now
      being made to extend the service permanently for use in this setting [e].
    Broader influence on control of tuberculosis in hard to reach groups
    In July 2009 NICE received the following referral from DH: "Produce
        programme guidance on the
        effectiveness and cost effectiveness of interventions based on active
        case finding among hard-to-reach
        groups (find and treat model) for reducing transmission of tuberculosis
        and related mortality
        and implications for service development." The guideline development
      group was chaired by
      Hayward and considered a wide range of evidence including the research
      described above and
      expert testimony from the Find&amp;Treat service. This resulted in the
      publication of NICE Public
        Health Guidance (37) on Identifying and managing tuberculosis among
        hard-to-reach groups [f].
      Key recommendations based on our findings included: mobile radiographic
      screening to expand to
      other higher incidence areas outside London; screening for TB in prisons;
      screening for latent TB
      in drug users; NHS to provide funds for housing of homeless TB patients
      with no other recourse to
      support; multidisciplinary teams to include social care workers to support
      care; directly observed
      therapy to become routine for homeless people, prisoners and drug users;
      cohort review (a service
      quality improvement model based on international experience and the London
      TB profile) to
      become routine across TB services nationally.
    Simultaneously the Royal College of Nursing, British Thoracic Society,
      Health Protection Agency,
      National Treatment Agency for Substance Misuse produced detailed practical
      guidance for
      tuberculosis case management and cohort review. In addition to the above
      this guidance includes
      a risk assessment tool modelled on our original TB patient profile form.
      This helps to systematically
      identify patients in need of enhanced case management [g].
    The approach of adding the support of allied health professionals to work
      alongside TB services
      which we pioneered in the TB Link project, is now in use in at least 18 TB
      services across London
      alone. A support workers' forum coordinated by Find&amp;Treat has recently
      been established, and the
      roles of those who attend vary considerably [h].
    
ImpactSummary

    Research by led Dr Andrew Hayward and Dr Alistair Story (UCL Research
      Department of Infection
      and Population Health) on tuberculosis in hard-to-reach groups
      (particularly homeless people,
      problem drug users and prisoners) has led to the introduction of mobile
      X-ray screening for
      tuberculosis in London, screening 8-10,000 homeless people and drug users
      annually. A pan-London
      street outreach team has been developed to support hard-to-reach patients
      with
      tuberculosis, and social care workers are now a core part of
      multidisciplinary TB teams. A static
      digital teleradiology TB screening network has been established in key
      prisons and, most recently,
      the research has influenced NICE Public Health Programme Guidelines.
    
UnderpinningResearch

    Research underpinning these impacts began in 2003 with the TB Link
        Project which aimed to
      improve patient outcomes by addressing social needs. Interventions mainly
      involved supporting
      access to housing (36%), income/benefits (34%) and immigration entitlement
      issues (7%). Over
      80% of cases successfully completed treatment. The research was carried
      out by Dr Andrew
      Hayward in collaboration with Alistair Story (Health Protection Agency
      (HPA) at that time, now
      UCL/UCLH) [1].
    In 2003/4 the London TB Patient Profile worked with all TB nurses
      in 35 clinics across London to
      look at social as well as clinical factors affecting patient outcomes. The
      study included 1,941
      patients (over 95% of London TB patients) and showed the importance of
      three risk factors in
      particular: homelessness, drug use and imprisonment. It demonstrated that
      these groups had
      extremely high prevalence of tuberculosis (higher than recent migrants
      from high incidence
      countries) and that these factors were strong independent predictors of
      drug resistance, poor
      adherence and loss to follow up [2]. Subsequent work based on this
      data showed that Crack
      Cocaine Users were substantially more likely than others to have smear
      positive (infectious) forms
      of tuberculosis than other cases, posing a great transmission risk [3].
      The work also demonstrated
      substantial missed opportunities for diagnosis and early treatment of HIV
      (only 50.8% of TB
      patients aged &gt; or =20 years without previous testing were offered HIV
      testing) [4].
    The first work to evaluate mobile X-ray screening started in
      collaboration with colleagues in
      Holland who were working on a similar project. In 2004 Story and Hayward
      led a three-day
        screening pilot across several of the larger homeless hostels in
      London, and in a prison. One
      case of TB was found in a prison, and one among the homeless. This
      proof-of-concept study
      demonstrated the potential of such a scheme, and prompted the Department
      of Health to fund a
      demonstration project entitled Evaluation of Targeted Mobile X Ray
        Screening for tuberculosis
        in high risk groups. Over 21 months the project undertook 23,881
      chest X-rays and led to 43
      patients starting treatment. Screening shortened delay to diagnosis
      three-fold. Modelling
      suggested this would prevent around 87 active cases and 389 infections per
      year by 2013 and that
      the intervention was cost-saving [5]. Nevertheless it highlighted
      that because patients were being
      lost between initial screening and diagnosis at a clinic, investment was
      also needed to support
      people through confirmation of diagnosis and treatment. The report also
      noted that high turnover of
      inmates in prisons prevented high screening coverage with a mobile unit.
    A subsequent evaluation of an expanded Find &amp; Treat service
      (Abubaker, then HPA now UCL and
      Aldridge, UCL) showed the cost effectiveness of the service in identifying
      hard to reach patients
      and supporting their care [6].
    