CaseStudyId: 32741
Title: 
    Ultra scale-down technologies for speeding routes to bioprocess
      manufacture
    

ImpactDetails

    Through adoption of new technologies, UCL's research into USD
      technologies has led to commercial benefits for companies developing new
      drugs by reducing the time to take new products to manufacture, with
        ensuing cost savings. EPSRC-commissioned reviews of the IMRC
      programmes have provided overall commentary on the impact of USD
      technologies [a]; the following provides specific examples of some of the
      industrial impacts achieved.
    New technologies adopted by industry: in 2009 GSK established a
      GSK-UCL Centre of Excellence in Bioprocessing: "in recognition of the
        high value of USD technologies in facilitating bioprocess development,
      GSK invested ~ &#163;1.03 million through UCL. This
        resulted in the successful development and integration of UCL USD
        technologies at GSK where they are employed to complement and accelerate
        in-house activities focused on (i) de-risking of lead molecules (ii)
        improving process understanding and (iii) abbreviating the critical path
        into full development. The use of high throughput microscale
        technologies for such purposes helps ensure only
          industrialisable molecules are selected and accelerated
        into development. In turn this can mean the difference
          between success and failure for a medicine through
        clinical trial stages and beyond." [b]
    The independent use by industry of USD technologies is growing. One
      example is to aid pilot-scale process development. The director of
      biopharm development at MedImmune said: "A major benefit is the increased
          predictability of cell line development that
        results from the use of USD techniques at an early project stage. Since
        2010 USD techniques have led to more predictable and better cell line
        performance when scaled up resulting in ~30% resource saving
          on each development project and an increase in
          project capacity of also ~30% per year, both at laboratory
        and pilot (100-200L bioreactor) scale." [c]
    Similarly, Protherics' application of USD techniques in production of its
      snake venom antidote in 2009 showed 20% savings in cost of goods
      compared to the previous process, saving the company around &#163;200,000
        since 2008. Subsequently Protherics applied IMRC USD techniques in
      the development of the process for CytoFab, a new product for sepsis
      therapy, where USD techniques cut the development length in half
      compared to traditional development techniques, saving around &#163;200,000.
      The process as developed using USD methods was validated at pilot-plant
      scale for use in 2009-2011 for clinical trials, having "triggered a
          stage payment of &#163;10 m to Protherics in 2008." [d]
    Pfizer has adopted the use of USD techniques as part of the toolbox in
        its process development activities to help improve liquid-solid
      separation in cell culture processing. In particular, the techniques were
      used to help understand the flocculation behaviour of high cell density
      lysates and develop an improved separation process using flocculation and
      centrifugation [text removed for publication] [e]. In the area of
      formulation processes for conjugated vaccines Pfizer have adopted USD
      techniques, therefore avoiding large-scale evaluation studies, which
        are costly and use industrial capacity for non-commercial production
      [e]. As of 2013, savings associated with the non-utilization of facility
      capacity are $280k/product transfer/site and the improved process
      understanding via USD characterisation may also lead to better risk
      mitigation with scale-up, technology transfer and rapid root-cause
      analysis for process-related issues.
    UCL's research has helped achieve a Quality by Design (QbD) agenda &#8212; a US
      Food and Drug Administration (FDA) initiative for the development of new
      therapies. This requires companies to work in new ways to achieve
      regulatory approval and validation status for their products, and offers
      major cost-saving potential. One USD collaborator comments, "A
      key feature of USD technologies is their role in helping
          biopharmaceutical companies to deliver a Quality by Design agenda
      via the early quantification of Critical Processing Parameters which
        determine Critical Product Attributes, eg the early indication of the
        impacts of process shear stress on the process streams involved in the
        Protherics studies. The FDA Quality by Design agenda is already valued
        at more than US$20bn to the overall biopharmaceuticals sector eg through
        a 25% reduction in time to market and delivery of more robust
        processes." [d]
    Next generation products developed by industry: One major impact
      has been via collaborative programmes focused on technology transfer into
      new sectors such as next generation recombinant vaccines. Over &#163;1m of
      industrial funding has been gained to support studies in the supply of
      novel vaccines and the use of USD to devise de novo bioprocesses eg in
      2010-2011 for novel fusion proteins with ImmunoBiology, which the company
      described as "extremely valuable" for its business activities [f]. In the
      period 2004-2008 BioVex, a UK biotechnology discovery company, were able
      to use USD to investigate the processing of a major vaccine candidate
      therapy, a Herpes Simplex virus engineered to kill cancer cells
      specifically. This understanding of the manufacturability of the virus
      product enabled BioVex to demonstrate and ultimately realise the value of
      their product through an up to US$1bn acquisition in 2011 by the US
        company Amgen.[g].
    A second key emerging industrial sector has been the provision of
        human cells for therapy via the development of USD technologies for
      whole bioprocess design. A &#163;1.8m company-TSB programme (2007-11) allowed
      UCL to explore the role of USD in speeding the development of allogeneic
      cell-based therapies. For example, for one of the partners, ReNeuron, the
      Chief Scientific Officer observed how USD tools helped them "identify
        ways in which robustness and acceptable yields may be retained," and
      that "The increased insight and understanding helps enhance
          the quality of process information to be used by the
        Contract Manufacturing Organisation (CMO) to inform scale up and also to
      help inform regulatory bodies with respect to meeting Quality by
          Design standards." [h]
    Creation of spin-out company: USD studies were an essential
      research technique in the development of novel adsorbent materials for
      bioprocessing, which UCL filed as a patent in 2013. A UCL start-up,
      Puridify, was established in 2013 to develop the new technology, which
      offers a ten-fold increase in purification productivity over existing
        reagents, with a lower lifetime cost. This will broaden
      patient access to drugs through reducing prices. In May 2013, the company
      won a &#163;100k OneStart award to take the venture forward with the
      establishment of 25m2 of bioprocessing laboratories and the
      engagement of 3 expert bioprocess scientists/engineers [i].
    
ImpactSummary

    UCL's creation of ultra scale-down (USD) technologies has led to economic
      benefits by speeding to manufacture next-generation healthcare products.
      This has resulted in documented savings for pharmaceutical companies in
      pilot-scale studies (eg ~&#163;280k for a protein therapy) and in manufacturing
      cost-of-goods (eg ~&#163;200k pa for an antibody). Licensing values realised
      for USD-facilitated manufacturing processes range from a &#163;10m early-stage
      payment for an antibody therapy [text removed for publication] to US$1bn
      for a therapeutic vaccine.
    Since 2008 some 40 companies have used UCL USD technologies, which have
      now also facilitated the formation of a spin-out company and additional
      job creation. Patient benefits have emerged through the contribution of
      USD to better bioprocess definition, with USD technologies now helping
      deliver the US Food and Drug Administration's Quality by Design initiative
      for biopharmaceuticals, valued at more than US$20bn a year through a 25%
      reduction in time-to-market and more robust manufacture.
    
UnderpinningResearch

    UCL research into ultra scale-down (USD) technologies has demonstrated
      how to take a projected process sequence for full-scale manufacture and
      then identify critical regimes such as regions of high stress or the
      presence of hostile interfaces. Such regimes are then reproduced using
      millilitre-scale devices so that it is possible, using just small
      quantities of precious material available at early stages of new product
      development, to predict full-scale manufacturing performance.
    The underpinning research focused on the characterisation of the
      effects of process stress on biomaterials. This was based on original
      fundamental research into the concept of critical regime analysis [1].
      Success was achieved in the creation of mimics of intricate high-stress
      centrifuge feed zones. These provided new insights into the effects on,
      for example, mammalian cells [2] and polymer-flocculated cell debris [3].
      Rigorous engineering characterisation was used with predictive models to
      verify hypotheses of how biological structures are affected during
      processing, e.g. for high acceleration centrifuge feed zones [2] and for
      high impact centrifuge discharge zones [4, 5].
    The research advanced understanding of how mechanical, hydrodynamic and
      impact stresses that exist during flow in the complex geometries found in
      manufacturing-scale equipment can affect the structure of delicate
      biological materials. In this way, such materials, including
      macromolecules and structured aggregates for biopharmaceuticals and
      vaccines, and whole cells for therapy, can be characterised in terms of
      their response to process engineering environments. The potency of USD
      technology is the ability to address whole bioprocesses and characterise
      key interactions between process stages. Key research findings
      have included an understanding of how the preparation of the material can
      affect its response to process stress, and how the material and process
      environment can be modified to avoid deleterious effects, for example for
      antibodies [5] and for human cells with defined surface markers for
      therapy [6].
    This research has led to subsequent successes, for example the
      characterisation of the impact of cell age on robustness to stress and the
      nature of antibody therapies formed [7], along with the design of
      processes for the recovery of a next generation fusion protein vaccine
      candidate [8]. UCL's USD technology has provided the first rigorous
      engineering basis for whole bioprocess design for such materials.
    The research outputs were achieved between 2000 and 2013, particularly
      through a managed EPSRC Innovative Manufacturing Research Centre (IMRC)
      programme in bioprocessing from 2002-2007, which was hosted and led by UCL
      Biochemical Engineering in collaboration with over 40 leading industrial
      research groups in the biopharmaceutical sector. This programmes focused
      on developing new fundamentals and applications of USD technologies and
      increasing the value base for continuing exploitation. Such collaborations
      allowed fundamental research with high-performance industrial strains and
      next generation therapies, and enabled access to industrial-scale
      manufacturing facilities for verifying USD predictions. This programme
      successfully created the USD concept from engineering fundamentals to a
      practical technology for application in the bioprocessing industries
      especially for macromolecular bioprocessing. The outputs of the research
      were reviewed four times by the EPSRC, with the 2005 international review
      and panel visit (York, Cabral, Middelberg) also commenting on industrial
      impact, eg: "The programme appears to be well designed to achieve its
        aim of changing the way bioprocesses are designed and optimized in the
        future. It is already achieving real benefits for its industrial
        partners". The second phase of the IMRC programme (2007-2012)
      emphasised greater company collaboration to help enhance the value of USD
      technologies and extend the application to the vaccine, human cell therapy
      and synthetic biology sectors.
    Key UCL academic staff involved in USD development were D.G. Bracewell
      (Post-doctoral Researcher, now Reader Biochemical Engineering) &#8212; new
      separations and creation of USD formulation and M. Hoare (Professor
      Biochemical Engineering) &#8212; programme director and creation of USD primary
      recovery. Other staff involved in complementary IMRC research were
      (Biochemical Engineering unless stated otherwise): F. Baganz (Lecturer now
      Senior Lecturer) &#8212; fermentation;; P.A. Dalby (Lecturer now Professor) &#8212;
      protein engineering / formulation; E. Keshavarz-Moore (Lecturer now
      Professor) &#8212; cell bioprocessing; G.J. Lye (Senior Lecturer now Professor)
      &#8212; microscale engineering; N.J. Titchener-Hooker (Professor) -process
      modelling; J. Ward (Senior Lecturer Biochemistry now Professor Biochemical
      Engineering) &#8212; cell biology; Y. Zhou (Lecturer now Senior Lecturer)- data
      handling; D. Nesbeth (Post-doctoral Researcher, now Lecturer) &#8212; synthetic
      biology; Tarit Mukhopadhay (EngD researcher now Lecturer) &#8212; vaccine
      bioprocessing.
    