CaseStudyId: 32744
Title: 
    SIP/SDP as an enabler of real-time internet communication
    

ImpactDetails

    Today, SIP is a key enabler of essential functionality within
      voice-over-IP (VoIP) and
      videoconferencing systems, as the standard interoperable method by which
      VoIP and
      videoconferencing systems signal and establish calls. Since 2008 it has
      been of benefit to the
      many millions of users who place multimedia calls, as well as the many
      vendors &#8212; including
      Microsoft, Apple, Cisco, Siemens, and Polycom &#8212; who market the software
      and hardware that
      underpins these calls.
    The market for these products, all of which interoperate by virtue of
      SIP/SDP, is substantial. A
      report by Visiongain, a telecommunications market research firm, estimates
      global VoIP revenues
      at $65 billion in 2012 [d]. IBISWorld, another telecommunications market
      research firm, estimates
      that the size of the US VoIP market has grown by 15.3% annually in the
      five years to July 2013 [e].
      As Baset et al. state in their February 2012 journal article, "It [SIP]
      has been an unquestionable
      success in becoming the lingua-franca for voice calling between vendor
      products and between
      domains." [a, p. 101] Although SIP/SDP are by no means the entirety of the
      technologies
      encompassed by VoIP and videoconferencing, SIP is the dominant open
      standard for the call
      signalling functionality in VoIP and videoconferencing. Baset et al. note:
      "There are hundreds of
      SIP product vendors, thousands of deployed SIP networks, and millions of
      SIP hosts in
      deployment today." [a, p. 93]
    SIP/SDP's standardisation in the Internet Engineering Task Force (IETF)
      and publication as
      Requests for Comments (RFCs) played a central role in their dissemination
      to the broad
      community of vendors of software and hardware for Internet-based
      communication. Many of these
      vendors actively participate in the IETF standards body, and nearly all
      monitor developments there
      in order to keep abreast of and influence new Internet protocol designs.
      RFCs are standards
      documents that specify the protocols used in Internet communication. They
      undergo a rigorous
      process of review by Internet researchers and technologists. SIP/SDP were
      proposed sufficiently
      early in the development of Internet-based multimedia communication that,
      when vendors first
      began designing products in this area, they were available as known,
      standardised solutions for
      the core problems of call routing and establishment, and for describing a
      session's content.
    As documents, RFCs are rigorous specifications of protocols, but somewhat
      abstract. Often
      vendors are more likely to adopt a protocol when there is a prototype
      implementation of it that they
      can examine and experiment with, since reading and running code reveals
      many nuances that
      aren't immediately apparent in an English-language specification.
      Accordingly the prototype
      SIP/SDP implementation, distributed as open-source software in Handley's
      Session Directory,
      Revisited (SDR) session directory tool and widely used in the 1990s by
      many thousands of Internet
      multimedia researchers, contributed to SIP/SDP's adoption. Since its
      adoption, as Baset et al.
      note:
    SIP has been implemented in hundreds (if not thousands) of different
      products. It has been
      implemented in phones, ranging from IP hardphones to soft clients to
      telephony adapters. It
      has been implemented in PSTN gateways, from single port analog gateways to
      massive,
      carrier-grade SS7 gateways. It is part of many enterprise PBX products,
      from small-scale
      small-medium-enterprise solutions to large multinational IP PBXs. It is a
      feature on nearly
      every carrier softswitch. Most firewalls have a SIP module. Indeed, SIP
      has given rise to
      entirely new product categories. Session Border Controllers (SBC) were
      born of industry
      needs around inter-domain SIP deployment. [a, p. 99]
    These impacts have been on-going through the entire REF impact period and
      have, as Baset et
      al. suggest, facilitated the development and improvement of a great many
      products used by a
      great many people around the world. There are, however, two very large
      such constituencies
      who have benefited both particularly directly and particularly
      significantly from SIP/SDP. One, as
      noted by Baset et al., is the many millions of individuals and enterprises
      who today place
      multimedia calls that are routed, signalled, and described using SIP/SDP.
      Some of those calls
      are placed over the Internet; others are placed over mobile telephone
      networks that have
      adopted Internet protocols for some of their functionality. This class of
      calls includes VoIP
      telephony and videoconferencing.
    Wired telephone handsets that use VoIP are now widely used in business
      and home settings alike.
      BT, Vodafone and all major telecoms companies provide SIP trunking
      capabilities, allowing
      businesses to directly connect SIP-based Private Branch Exchange (PBX)
      systems to the global
      phone network in a cost-effective manner, circumventing the need for
      conventional dedicated
      telephone lines, and providing access to advanced features. Thus, for
      example, by connecting to
      its worldwide audio conferencing service provider via a SIP trunking
      service, Oracle Global IT
      "realised a cumulative $18 million in cost savings since 2010, while
      experiencing a 32% increase in
      minutes of use to over 60 million minutes per month." [f] Moreover, as
      Baset et al. further state,
      "SIP has been deployed by dozens, if not hundreds, of service providers,
      and runs within countless
      enterprises. Billions of minutes of traffic are carried on SIP" [a, p.
      99]. Commercial benefits
      comparable with those within Oracle Global IT have accrued to many of
      those enterprises.
    Many 3G and newer mobile telephone networks use SIP for call signalling
      of enhanced features
      such as user location and video calls; as such, SIP also underpins the
      routing and signalling of
      calls for the world's vast population of 3G mobile telephone users.
      Videoconferencing, another
      application in which SIP/SDP provides call signalling, is also very widely
      used, not only in high-end
      telepresence systems and VoIP hardware phones, but also in software
      available for laptops or
      smartphones.
    The second main constituency benefitting from SIP/SDP since 2008 consists
      of the many vendors
      who sell software and hardware for VoIP and videoconferencing that route,
      signal, and describe
      calls with SIP/SDP. Many of these vendors discuss SIP-related issues in an
      industry forum
      devoted entirely to SIP [g]. Today, Cisco, Siemens, and Polycom
      manufacture VoIP handsets that
      implement SIP/SDP; Cisco and Siemens also make and sell VoIP
      infrastructure such as SIP proxy
      servers and SIP registration servers, and Cisco and Polycom now make
      high-definition
      telepresence systems using SIP [c, h]. To date, Cisco has shipped over 50
      million SIP-enabled IP
      phones. A statement from Cisco's Chief Technology Officer for the
      company's Cisco Collaboration
      division noted: "SIP is the core call signaling protocol across our
      portfolio today and it has helped
      us interoperate between our products and with other vendors. Cisco
      collaboration is a nearly 4
      billion dollar business of Cisco representing over 8% of revenue." [h]
    Myriad mobile telephone base station vendors also implement SIP for 3G
      (and later) call signalling.
      Furthermore, Apple's popular FaceTime videoconferencing software, which is
      now included with
      every iPhone, iPad, and MacBook, signals calls using SIP, a fact noted by
      Steve Jobs in his
      introduction of the iPhone 4 during a keynote speech at Apple's Worldwide
      Developers'
      Conference (WWDC) in 2010 [b].
    
ImpactSummary

    Pioneering research at UCL Department of Computer Science (CS) into
      multimedia
      communications over the Internet led directly to the development of
      central techniques used in
      voice-over-IP (VoIP), videoconferencing, and instant messaging. Millions
      of people worldwide
      today use applications that incorporate these techniques. In particular,
      UCL CS created the
      Session Initiation Protocol (SIP) and the Session Description Protocol
      (SDP), two Internet
      standards that comprise the primary way multimedia calls are established
      on the Internet. They are
      at the core of products made by Microsoft, Apple, Cisco, Siemens, and
      Polycom, among many
      others, and are used in most 3G mobile telephone networks. Implementing
      the technology reduces
      costs for businesses, with Oracle, for example, realising $18 million in
      savings since 2010.
    
UnderpinningResearch

    In the early 1990s, the conventional wisdom was that real-time
      communications such as telephony
      and videoconferencing required circuit-switched or virtual-circuit
      networks. Many fundamental
      research questions were raised about whether &#8212; and how &#8212; one could instead
      conduct such
      communications over packet-switched networks such as the Internet. These
      included questions,
      for example, about how to ensure call quality, efficiently distribute
      audio and video to multiple
      participants, and locate users and establish calls between them. Specific
      challenges within user
      location and call establishment included minimising call setup latency,
      preserving users' privacy
      during decentralised user location, and providing an extensible mechanism
      to allow the negotiation
      of diverse types of sessions. This case study focuses on underpinning
      research at UCL that solved
      these problems in user location and call establishment for Internet
      multimedia calls, culminating in
      the design of the Session Initiation Protocol (SIP) and Session
      Description Protocol (SDP).
    This underpinning research took place under the EU MICE project (starting
      in 1992) and EU
      MERCI project (starting in 1995), as part of which researchers at UCL
      conducted extensive
      research into and subsequent pilot studies of Internet multimedia
      conferencing. The work
      incorporated three intertwined research strands: algorithm and protocol
      design; building
      prototypes; and active participation in the Internet Engineering Task
      Force (IETF), the technical
      standards body that codifies protocols used for communication over the
      Internet. Contributions to
      the lETF help increase the chance that research impacts practice. At the
      IETF, intensive
      discussions with equipment vendors, network operators, and experienced
      protocol designers yield
      insights beyond those typically gleaned from experiments in a university
      laboratory, as well as
      highlight factors that impact on a design's deployability.
    SIP/SDP provide low-latency call setup by adopting an optimistic codec
      and parameter negotiation
      mechanism. The protocols, which subsequently found such diverse uses as
      instant messaging and
      file transfer, provide an extensible solution for the types of session
      being negotiated. Finally,
      SIP/SDP allow extensive use of proxy servers to decentralise the
      processing of calls and enable a
      framework for privacy-preserving user-location, no matter which of several
      devices a user currently
      employs. This enabled telecommunications providers to embed SIP within
      legacy networks using
      proxies as gateways, and eased the transition from circuit-switched to
      packet-switched telephony.
    As this work on SIP/SDP matured, Mark Handley introduced the new
      protocols at the IETF for
      consideration as possible Internet standards. SDP's first draft
      specification was submitted in
      November 1995 [3], and SIP's in February 1996 [2]. Today, these protocols
      are extremely widely
      implemented and used.
    Mark Handley wrote the SDP specification, which originated in a
      generalisation of and set of
      extensions to an earlier protocol implemented but never specified by Van
      Jacobson at LBNL. Mark
      Handley was the main author of the SIP version 1.0 specification [2]
      submitted to the IETF in
      February 1996 (co-authored with Eve Schooler of the California Institute
      of Technology and initially
      known as the Session Invitation Protocol). Henning Schulzrinne (today of
      Columbia University and
      the US Federal Communications Commission, then based at the Gesellschaft
      f&#252;r Mathematik und
      Datenverarbeitung [GMD]) wrote a competing proposal called SCIP, also in
      Feb 1996. Handley
      published a workshop paper in October 1996 that further described the
      ongoing work on SIP/SDP
      [1]. In late 1996, Handley and Schulzrinne merged SIP v1.0 and SCIP to
      form SIP v2.0. Although
      this version was later enhanced by additional specifications clarifying
      SIP's use in particular
      circumstances, SIP v2.0 is essentially the protocol used today. Most of
      its protocol semantics came
      from SIP v1.0, as did its use of SDP to describe sessions, but the syntax
      and ability to control
      sessions after establishment came from SCIP. SIP v2.0 resulted from
      roughly equal contributions
      made in Handley's work at UCL and Schulzrinne's work at GMD. The SIP/SDP
      standards have
      continued to be updated [4]; the most recent revision of SDP was
      re-published as RFC 4566 in
      July 2006 [5].
    From 1991 to October 1996, Mark Handley was a research fellow at UCL. He
      returned to UCL in
      2003 as Professor of Networked Systems. A unique corroboration of
      Handley's central role in the
      development of multimedia communication protocols for the Internet was the
      award to him of the
      2012 IEEE Internet Award, a career-long achievement award given to the
      handful of technology
      leaders deemed by the IEEE to have most impacted the design and deployment
      of the Internet.
      The citation for Handley's award reads: "For contributions to Internet
      multicast, telephony,
      congestion control, and the shaping of open Internet standards and
      open-source systems in all
      these areas."
    