CaseStudyId: 33268
Title: 
    Impact on UK Government funding and decisions relating to the improvement
      of UK e-infrastructure
    

ImpactDetails

    Prior to the impacts described in this section the UK's e-infrastructure
      suffered from a fragmented funding regime, with resources being funded by
      a variety of bodies representing diverse user groups. There was also a
      distinct lack of a coordinated policy and strategy for UK
      e-infrastructure, and no single coordinating body that represented all
      relevant stakeholders. This fragmented organisation of the national
      infrastructure, together with no guarantee of future provision,
      discouraged business from becoming involved, inhibited collaboration
      between organisations and resulted in the UK losing its ability to compete
      internationally in the field.
    In 2011, as a result of the strength of UCL research in the field,
      Coveney was asked by the UK e-Science Institute to lead on the publication
      of a report into the UK's e-infrastructure, with the objective to develop
      a strategy to overcome the problems of fragmented funding and
      coordination. The Strategy for the UK Research Computing Ecosystem
      report [A], published in October 2011, was the result of a number of
      meetings (with the involvement of UK Science and Universities Minister Rt
      Hon David Willetts MP in July 2011). It set out a holistic approach for
      the UK's e-infrastructure involving the different Research Councils,
      funding bodies and user communities in a coherent collaboration.
      Non-university users of the e-infrastructure include automotive,
      pharmaceutical, software and hardware industry sectors; charity-funded
      research laboratories (for example, the London Research Institute); and
      many publicly funded research institutes, including the Met Office, Culham
      and AWE (Atomic Weapons Establishment). Specific recommendations made in
      the Strategy report were to (i) set up an independent coordinating
      body to govern the e-infrastructure that reports directly to the
      Government, (ii) drive the development of software, hardware and
      networking for all stakeholders (including national supercomputing service
      providers and Research Councils) in the e-infrastructure, and (iii) offer
      e-science training to develop the next generation of computationally aware
      researchers who are able to use the improved e-infrastructure. Coveney's
      role in directing and shaping these recommendations was directly
      consequent on the UCL team's research in computational science, including
      computational chemistry.
    This document in turn fed into and informed a key policy document
      entitled A Strategic Vision for UK e-Infrastructure, commissioned
      by Willetts and published by the Department for Business, Innovation and
      Skills (BIS) in January 2012 [B]. This document addressed the advanced
      computational capacity of the UK as a system (i.e. as an
      e-infrastructure), and proposed a series of recommendations on software,
      hardware, networks, data storage and skills to help develop this
      e-infrastructure. In particular, the Vision report took forward
      the specific recommendations made in the Strategy report,
      demonstrating that the Strategy report informed Government
      understanding of the issues. As a direct result of the first of these
      recommendations the Government created the UK E-Infrastructure Leadership
      Council (ELC) in March 2012 [C]. The ELC has the responsibility to advise
      the Government on e-infrastructure development and to develop a wider plan
      for stakeholder engagement. It is currently working on mechanisms for
      engaging industry and healthcare with the newly funded e-infrastructure,
      including an "On Ramp" programme that seeks to identify and remove
      barriers to the uptake of e-infrastructure by UK PLCs. The strong
      influence of the Strategy report on the Vision report is
      clearly evidenced in the Chairman's foreword and the references of the
      latter report [B]. For example, the Chairman wrote: "I was commissioned by
      the Minister to write a report on how we might create an e-infrastructure
      that would support a strong public-private partnership. [...] We have been
      able to move quickly by building on some excellent analysis. I think
      particularly of the work of the academic community summarised in the
      report by Peter Coveney Strategy for the UK Research Computing
        Ecosystem" [B].
    As a result of these two policy documents (mainly the Strategy
      report, which was already published at the time), in October 2011 the
      Government earmarked &#163;145 million (increased to &#163;165 million in early
      2012) to improve the UK's HPC capabilities and wider e-infrastructure [D,
      E]. This investment has resulted in improvements to existing
      e-infrastructure such as the UK academic network JANET and high-capacity
      data storage across the Research Councils, and has funded a number of HPC
      activities in the UK including Emerald, one of the largest Graphics
      Processing Unit systems in Europe, now located in the Rutherford Appleton
      Laboratory in Daresbury, and IRIDIS, a conventional 100-teraFLOPS
      supercomputer, located at the University of Southampton. These activities
      have vastly increased the computing capacity and capability in the UK.
      This has wide-ranging industrial and economic impact, including allowing
      the NHS and UK PLCs to use these resources, and attracting hi-tech
      industry from overseas. For example, companies including IBM, Intel and
      Cisco have already made investments into the UK following this Government
      investment in e-infrastructure [F].
    The Vision report (and therefore the Strategy report) has
      further influenced Government spending, with the Government's on-going
      commitment to improving UK e-infrastructure demonstrated by the allocation
      of an additional &#163;189 million in capital funding to this area in December
      2012. This investment was part of the &#163;600 million capital funding for
      science announced in the Chancellor's 2012 Autumn Statement, and the
      amount allocated to e-infrastructure was communicated by Willetts at
      Policy Exchange in January 2013, where he described e-infrastructure &#8212; or
      "Big Data" &#8212; as one of the "eight great technologies" which will propel
      the UK to future growth [F]. The &#163;189 million, to be invested over the
      next two years, has been allocated to areas including "e-Infrastructure
      for Biosciences" and "Administrative Data Research Centres" [G]; it was
      announced in February 2013 that &#163;30 million has already been awarded to
      the Hartree Centre in Daresbury and its academic and industrial partners,
      in part to develop new technology to make supercomputers more efficient
      [H].
    The work of the UCL team has also informed policy debate. In June 2013,
      Coveney was invited to speak at a House of Lords meeting about scientific
      infrastructure [I], as part of an inquiry into that topic launched by the
      Science and Technology Committee in May 2013. He reminded the audience of
      the recommendations for UK e-infrastructure made in the Strategy
      report, and explained that whilst the initial Government investments and
      formation of the ELC are excellent outcomes of this report, there are a
      number of critical recommendations that have yet to be implemented. These
      include holistic management of investments in e-infrastructure, a focus on
      software development in addition to investments in hardware, and the
      provision of appropriate training across a wide range of disciplines. His
      presentation sparked considerable discussion and debate amongst meeting
      attendees about these and other issues relating to UK e-infrastructure.
    
ImpactSummary

    In 2011, a leading role was given to Peter Coveney in UCL's Department of
      Chemistry in defining the future strategy for the UK's e-infrastructure,
      based on the department's expertise and research in this field. This
      appointment led to the publication of the Strategy for the UK Research
        Computing Ecosystem document, which has since stimulated debate
      amongst policy makers and informed government policy. On the basis of its
      recommendations, the government has set up an advisory E-Infrastructure
      Leadership Council and allocated &#163;354 million to improving the UK's
      high-performance computing capabilities and wider e-infrastructure, a move
      that is having wide-ranging industrial and economic impact in the UK. Most
      recently, in June 2013 the Strategy document stimulated further
      debate about the UK's e-infrastructure at the House of Lords.
    
UnderpinningResearch

    E-infrastructures are connected systems of computational technology and
      resources that can facilitate distributed collaboration and computation. A
      single e-infrastructure may involve the interoperation of high-performance
      computing (HPC), cloud computing, mid-range computer systems, databases,
      networks, image resources, instruments, software and people, which may all
      be geographically dispersed across a nation or even across the world.
    A research group in UCL's Department of Chemistry makes use of
      e-infrastructures to access globally distributed computational resources,
      including some of the world's largest supercomputers. In addition to
      carrying out their own research using computational science, the group
      also researches the use and development of computational resources. This
      includes the development of tools that enable users to make use of
      e-infrastructures more easily.
    The unification of distributed computational resources within and between
      e-infrastructures to solve challenging problems is known as grid
      computing. It is conducted through the use of software &#8212; referred to as
      middleware &#8212; which ties together the resources from the e-infrastructures
      that constitute the grid; however, these middleware are usually complex
      and difficult for end users to deploy, with the result that the full power
      of computational grids is rarely realised. To tackle this problem and
      encourage the integrated use of dispersed resources, the UCL group
      developed the Application Hosting Environment (AHE), a lightweight (i.e.
      simpler than other middleware tools) but powerful middleware tool that
      hides much of the complexity of the grid from the user.
    The first version of the AHE was developed in 2006 by the UCL group and
      collaborators at the University of Manchester (McKeown and Pickles) [1].
      The Manchester team helped to define the architecture; the implementation
      and deployment were performed by UCL. Version 2.0, with enhanced features
      and usability, was developed by the UCL group's Peter Coveney (Professor
      2002-present) in 2009 [2]. The AHE consists of an ensemble of programs
      written in Perl with command-line and Graphical User Interface client
      tools, and is a form of "non-invasive" middleware, meaning that it is not
      necessary for grid management teams to usually even be aware that the AHE
      is interfacing with the lower-level middleware resident on the different
      e-infrastructures. The AHE provides the user with a single interface to
      all computing resources (e.g. different supercomputers) on which they have
      accounts, enabling them to perform all manner of complex workflows on
      these resources, from the most basic form of single job submission to
      complex orchestrated sets of applications.
    Previous research conducted by the UCL group included international
      leading work on soft matter and computational chemistry, all using
      high-performance computing, visualisation and computational steering to
      make new discoveries in these domains of the chemical sciences. The AHE
      was developed to facilitate these investigations, and has since been
      exploited by the UCL group to conduct further research pertaining to the
      chemical and biomedical sciences, which is leading to broad impact in
      medical applications. For example, it enabled them to use grid computing
      resources in both Europe and the US in 2008 to apply molecular dynamics
      techniques to study the structure and stability of DNA intercalated in
      layered double hydroxides (LDHs) [3]. Their simulations indicate that DNA
      intercalated into LDHs is endowed with enhanced structural stability, a
      finding which gives support to the origins-of-life theory that LDHs could
      have acted as a protective environment for the first nucleic acids in
      extreme environmental conditions. In another example, in 2008-10 the AHE
      enabled the group to use combined UK and US computational resources to
      estimate and rank the binding affinities of inhibitors with the wild type
      and variants of HIV-1 protease, an attractive target for HIV/AIDS therapy
      [4, 5]. This research showed that molecular dynamics can achieve accurate
      and rapid relative binding affinity ranking. Indeed, the concerted use of
      computing resources and automated workflow enabled through the AHE make
      turnaround of an array of binding affinities feasible within three days;
      such rapidity is crucial for enhancing patient-specific clinical decision
      support.
    UCL owes its prominence in the field to the strength of its published
      research, which has led to Coveney and others being appointed to
      leadership positions relating to the use of computers in research,
      including Coveney's chairmanship of the Collaborative Computational
      Projects Steering Panel (since 2006) and membership of the UK High-End
      Computing Strategy Committee (2006-2010). These pivotal positions as a
      spokesperson for the community have enabled the impacts described in
      section 4.
    