CaseStudyId: 33269
Title: 
    Raman spectroscopy benefiting the authentication, conservation, display
      and handling of historic objects
    

ImpactDetails

    RS is used extensively and is valued as one of the analysis techniques of
      choice by heritage scientists. It is a highly specific, non-destructive
      analytical technique that can be applied in situ, and is highly
      sensitive both to the structure and composition of the sample. Clark's
      fundamental studies, collaboration activities and continuing work in this
      field provided a vital contribution to the adoption and widespread use of
      RS in heritage science and museums. His significant contribution has been
      recognised by The Royal Society, who awarded him the 2008 Bakerian Lecture
      for "his pioneering work using the technique of RS as applied to artwork
      and artefacts". The society added:
    "The research is having a profound effect on the art, archaeology and
      museum worlds; he [Clark] has shown that numerous profound and critical
      issues which could not previously be addressed can now not only be
      addressed but resolved. This has influenced major institutions such as the
      Louvre, the Getty, the Metropolitan of New York and the British Museum
      (among others) to install Raman microscope systems in recognition of their
      striking effectiveness as analytical tools." [A] Additionally, his work
      has been further recognised by a number of eminent scientific and
      scholarly organisations (American Philosophical Society, the Royal Society
      of Chemistry, the Fondation de la Maison de la Chimie and the Chemical
      Heritage Foundation) in the last five years, each of which has
      acknowledged Clark's contribution to bridging the science world with the
      humanities and arts, and demonstrating chemistry's role in shaping society
      [B].
    The Indianapolis Museum of Art (IMA) and the Victoria &amp; Albert Museum
      (V&amp;A) in London have both employed former members of the Clark group.
      Their expertise in RS, developed whilst at UCL, benefits analysis of art
      and historic artefacts at the institutions. The IMA established a
      Conservation Science Laboratory in 2011 and one of the first instruments
      purchased for the new facility was a Raman spectrometer [C], an instrument
      that vastly expanded the museum's conservation and analytical
      capabilities. Prior to this, only optical and polarised light spectroscopy
      were available, techniques that are not only time consuming to use but are
      of limited value in pigment identification. Around 50 objects are analysed
      in the facility per year, and RS analysis is applied to all of them at
      some point during their study [C]. In 2012, in partnership with Cincinnati
      Art Museum, a combination of RS and X-ray fluorescence spectroscopy were
      used to map the location of specific pigments and, following a computer
      reconstruction, revealed the original appearance of the white flowers in
      Vincent van Gogh's painting of 1890 Undergrowth with Two Figures;
      this reconstruction is now displayed to the public [C].
    In 2009, in collaboration with Clark, five miniatures at the V&amp;A were
      unambiguously confirmed to be modern forgeries (five `Spanish Forger'
      paintings), and the detection of metallic bismuth on an illuminated
      Bourdichon miniature added to the knowledge of trade routes and pigment
      availability in medieval Europe [D]. Subsequently, in 2010, having
      benefited from access to the Raman facilities and collaborating with the
      team at UCL, the V&amp;A purchased its own Raman spectrometer, a resource
      that is used on a weekly basis [E]. Having a Raman spectrometer available
      at the V&amp;A has made it possible to analyse non-destructively and in
        situ museum objects that were, until recently, off-limits due to
      restrictions to their sampling. Furthermore, where inorganic pigments,
      minerals and gemstones are concerned, analyses now take a few seconds or
      minutes to complete, bringing about considerable savings in terms of staff
      time and increasing productivity. In all, around 150 objects are now
      studied each year using the technique at the V&amp;A, with analysis
      results not only enabling dating and authentication of collections, but
      also informing curators as to whether objects are appropriate for proposed
      exhibitions and impacting upon their conservation [E]. Utilising their own
      system in 2012, V&amp;A staff were able to investigate distinct
      "fingerprints" of pigments for different artists, which led to changes in
      the attributions of three portrait miniatures: the original Tudor
      portraits of "Mr and Mrs Croker", which have suffered from troubled
      attribution histories, were attributed to Nicholas Hilliard or his
      workshop; and a third portrait miniature (miniature 630-1882) was
      reattributed from Isaac Oliver to Hilliard or his workshop [F].
    UK libraries (Bodleian Library and BL) have also benefited from
      collaborating with the UCL group and implementing RS analysis. By using RS
      to ascertain and understand the chemical behaviour of specific pigments,
      conservators are now able to control the display and storage schedule to
      reduce degradation of objects, understand and update conservation records,
      add support to conservation strategies, and also provide instructions to
      readers about certain items for which there may be a health and safety
      impact; for example, the requirement to wear gloves where poisonous
      arsenic-containing pigments are identified (especially in the case of
      Indian manuscripts). Furthermore, the collaboration between UCL and the BL
      (1996 to 2008) was highlighted in the House of Lords Science and
      Technology Committee Science and Heritage report as an example of how
      academics and curators can work together to develop academic agendas
      whilst answering both curatorial and conservation questions. This same
      report concluded that collaboration between university and museum-based
      scientists is crucial to heritage science. Subsequently, the Science and
      Heritage Programme (established to take forward the recommendations from
      these reports) has promoted further collaboration of this nature through
      research clusters and networking funding, with examples reported in the
      most recent review (2012) [G].
    The pigment database developed by UCL is also valued by researchers and
      is considered significant to the conservation science field because it was
      one of the first online reference spectra collections for art materials.
      The Museum of Fine Arts in Boston (MFA) printed out the set of UCL Raman
      spectra as a reference when they purchased their Raman spectrometer in
      2008, and still regularly consult the printouts today [H]. The images of
      67 of the Raman reference spectra generated by UCL, along with links to
      the UCL Raman Spectroscopic Library website, are included in the
      Conservation &amp; Art Materials Encyclopedia Online (CAMEO) database that
      was developed by the MFA &#8212; a database that is regularly accessed
      worldwide. The Schorr Family Associate Research Scientist at the MFA said
      in May 2013: "in the last year, 80,000 unique visitors provided over
      250,000 page views. The hits came from 165 countries. A random check of
      several pigment pages that include UCL reference spectra gave the
      following hit results over the past year: berberine (14), lazurite (31),
      malachite (298), orpiment (93), vermilion (219)." [H]
    The UCL research has also had an impact on the sale of Raman
      spectrometers by Renishaw, a world leader in the manufacture and supply of
      these instruments. The company's International Sales Manager and
      Applications Specialist said: "From a commercial aspect the importance of
      this field of interest [the use of RS in heritage work] has led to a
      significant number of sales that one could argue would not have been
      possible without Professor Clark's fundamental studies". Renishaw was the
      first supplier of a high-end bench Raman microscope and today enjoys a
      dominant position in the marketplace. It sells instruments worldwide [text
      removed for publication] [I].
    
ImpactSummary

    The Department of Chemistry at UCL has pioneered the use of Raman
      spectroscopy (RS) for the identification of pigments in and the in
        situ examination of objects that are of artistic, cultural, or
      historical importance. Until recently this was a relatively unknown and
      rarely used technique in heritage science. RS is now used regularly by
      conservators worldwide and has become an important analysis tool in
      museums and libraries including the Victoria &amp; Albert Museum, the
      Indianapolis Museum of Art and the Museum of Fine Arts in Boston.
      Collaboration between the British Library and UCL was highlighted by the
      House of Lords Science and Technology Committee, helping to promote
      further collaboration between universities and museums. The use of RS in
      heritage science has also benefited manufacturers of RS equipment, and has
      led to enhanced understanding of the histories and care requirements of a
      wide range of artefacts.
    
UnderpinningResearch

    Using his extensive experience of transition metal chemistry, UCL
      Department of Chemistry researcher Robin Clark (Ramsay Professor
      1989-2008; Emeritus Ramsay Professor 2008-present) realised that RS could
      be used to investigate artists' materials and their degradation products
      in a novel way. Therefore, he undertook research to enable the full
      realisation of the potential of RS in the non-destructive technical
      examination of art objects. The research carried out at UCL has provided a
      major contribution to this field since 1993, demonstrating the sensitivity
      and precision of the technique in identifying pigments and other
      materials, both rapidly and without ambiguity.
    RS is a non-destructive technique, making it ideal for the analysis of
      organic and inorganic pigments in artworks and artefacts on which
      destructive or sampling techniques &#8212; such as powder X-ray diffraction and
      scanning electron microscopy &#8212; may not be permitted. Furthermore, since
      each distinct material gives rise to a unique Raman spectrum, the
      technique can be used to identify unambiguously which pigments are
      present.
    One of the Clark group's important contributions to the emerging field
      was a 1995 study in which they showed that RS is an ideal technique for
      distinguishing between lead-based yellow pigments used in antiquity. When
      previous conventional non-destructive spectroscopic analyses were used,
      these pigments &#8212; the two types of lead tin yellow, Pb2SnO4
      and PbSn1-xSixO3, and the
      similarly coloured and structured lead antimonate, Pb2Sb2O7
      &#8212; were difficult to identify unambiguously in the presence of other
      compounds commonly found on artefacts, due to their similar, broad
      electronic spectra. The Clark group demonstrated that the pigments could,
      however, be readily distinguished in situ using RS by comparing
      the Raman spectra of laboratory-synthesised lead tin oxides and typical
      contemporary primer and binding agents with those obtained from medieval
      paintings and manuscripts [1].
    During the early work, Clark identified the lack of reference databases
      for the analysis of pigments using RS and proceeded to collect the first
      set of pigment reference spectra at several different excitation
      wavelengths in 1995. This was immediately popular, and both it and an
      updated database published in 2001 are still extensively used by Raman
      scientists all over the world working at the arts-science interface. The
      2001 work [2] also introduced Fourier-Transform (FT) Raman as another
      option for the analysis of organic materials, particularly common binders
      and varnishes, which either show little response to conventional Raman
      excitation or fluoresce.
    In 2001, the Clark group determined under which conditions of laser
      wavelength, power and irradiation time PbO2 and common lead
      pigments Pb3O4, PbO and 2PbCO3&#8226;Pb(OH)2
      degrade, and through which pathways [3]. Their results revealed how to
      correctly identify lead pigments originally used on an artwork, and how to
      recognise when unwanted degradation is occurring during RS analysis. This
      work also validated previous studies on the identification of lead
      pigments by RS, and further confirmed that RS could be used in situ
      on such artefacts without causing degradation, allowing other groups to
      conduct RS studies on lead pigments with confidence.
    Contributions to the field also included many studies conducted jointly
      with cultural heritage institutions [4, 5, 6]. In collaboration with the
      British Library (BL), the Lindisfarne Gospels (from AD 715-721) were
      analysed using RS as, although well studied from a palaeographical
      standpoint, much less was known about the materials used on the
      manuscripts and the methods used in their construction. The details
      regarding the use of pigments in such works were previously identifb01ed
      purely by a visual inspection and had become accepted as fact. As such,
      important information ascribing to date or point of origin for the greater
      understanding in an historical context remained undiscovered. The analysis
      performed on the Lindisfarne Gospels revealed the presence of pigments
      including calcite CaCO3, indigo C16H10N2O2,
      orpiment As2S3, vergaut (indigo mixed with
      orpiment), verdigris (uncertain variant), red lead Pb3O4,
      white lead 2PbCO3&#8226;Pb(OH)2 and gold, confirming that
      most of the pigments that were considered to be there were indeed present
      [4]. Importantly, however, the blue pigment lazurite Na8[Al6Si6O24]Sn
      was not found on the manuscript; instead, all the blue colouring in the
      gospels came from indigo (which was readily available in England at the
      time). Earlier studies of the gospels had implied that there was a trade
      route in the 8th century between Afghanistan &#8212; the location of
      the only source of lazurite at the time &#8212; and Northumberland; in fact, the
      UCL work found the earliest use of lazurite on an English manuscript to be
      more than two centuries later [4]. Interesting studies of astronomical and
      cartographic Islamic folios held at the Bodleian Library, Oxford, were
      also made [5]. In a further study, the identification of key pigments on
      "Young Woman Seated on a Virginal" supported work from the History of Art
      Department at UCL, by providing persuasive evidence consistent with
      reattribution of this painting to Vermeer [6]. The research led to the
      sale of this painting by Sotheby's for &#163;16.2 million.
    