CaseStudyId: 34166
Title: 
    Improving transport and access to transport for people with barriers
        to mobility
    

ImpactDetails

    Each day, a total of 7.1 million trips are made on London's transport
      system by people with a barrier to mobility; that is, with a disability,
      aged over 74, or accompanied by a child under five (and therefore likely
      to have a buggy and/or to be carrying heavy luggage) [a]. By catalysing
      and informing improvements in several areas of that system, the research
      outlined above has not only allowed transport providers to deliver better
      &#8212; and often more cost effective &#8212; services, but has also improved users'
      access to and experience of public transport. As such, it has enhanced
      visitor and tourist experiences of London, encouraged wider take-up of
      London's transport service, and helped improve the welfare and quality of
      life of the millions of people who use those services every day,
      particularly among those with mobility barriers.
    London Underground &#8212; platform humps: The research on platform
      humps formed the basis of recommendations London Underground used to
      develop specifications for the installation of humps on the Victoria Line
      upgrade (2010-2011), and on all other lines as they are upgraded. It found
      that the design could be more flexible than previously thought and the
      cost per hump reduced from the initial &#163;500,000 to &#163;300,000, with the
      prospect of reducing it further to &#163;100,000. The humps were introduced on
      the Victoria Line between 2010 and 2011 and the Metropolitan line in 2012.
      As of 2012, 90 humps had been installed at 35 stations across the
      Underground network, representing a multi-million pound saving to TfL. [a]
    The results of UCL's work on Thameslink 2000 ensured that, in
      2008, the specifications UCL recommended were supplied to all bidders for
      the train design and manufacture call for tenders. The Thameslink research
      highlighted some issues that were then pursued by Network Rail with
      Siemens as part of the final negotiations over the supply of these trains
      [output 4, above]. The work was also a cornerstone of the House of Lords
      Select Committee on Science and Technology Report on Government
      Procurement (2011), in which Tyler's empirical approach to using
      scientific facilities was praised as an example of best practice in
      innovative procurement, rather than relying on computer models alone to
      provide estimates [b]. The work has been made available to the Crossrail
      team, with the DfT's Chief Scientific Advisor recommending they adopt a
      similar process (although at an earlier stage) for their trains [c]. The
      Select Committee also commented that the Olympic Delivery Authority had
      taken note of the Thameslink project with a view to including its findings
      in their activities for its train transport systems [b].
    The research has informed transport authorities' understanding of the
      value of life-scale research. For example, in 2012-13, London
        Underground's use of PAMELA for the New Concept Deep Tube Train
      Programme [d] was the first time they started to develop the concept from
      the passenger perspective rather than the mechanical/engineering
      perspective. The results of the trials have enabled London Underground to
      test and consider impacts on boarding and alighting rates resulting from
      different options in the design of the internal and external details of
      the train and the platform accoutrements (such as platform edge doors). As
      a result, they have reduced the size of the doors on the new train design
      to 1600mm, for inclusion in the project tender documents [e].
    Shared road space, Exhibition Road, South Kensington: The work at
      UCL allowed the resolution of concerns raised by the Guide Dogs for the
      Blind Association about the safety of including a kerb-free,
      single-surface space shared by pedestrians and vehicles within the local
      borough's &#163;30 million redevelopment of Exhibition Road. UCL's research
      findings were cited in a judicial review of the project in 2010 [f]. One
      of UCL's recommendations was for on-street testing of the corduroy paving
      at "more acute" angles; Kensington and Chelsea Council commissioned this
      testing from MVA Consultancy in 2010 and 2011 [g]. The corduroy surface
      recommended in the underpinning research findings was eventually installed
      in the area, which is used by around 11 million visitors each year [h, f].
    
ImpactSummary

    Research by UCL's Centre for Transport Studies using PAMELA, a
      real-world-scale facility for conducting experiments into pedestrian
      movement, has improved transport services for customers on Thameslink
      trains and the London Underground, including increasing accessibility to
      London's transport for people with barriers to mobility, who make 7.1
      million journeys each day. The work has led to multimillion-pound savings
      for Transport for London by reducing the cost of Underground platform
      humps. It has also informed government advice on procurement and enabled
      the resolution of concerns raised by the Guide Dogs for the Blind
      Association about the safety of the Exhibition Road redevelopment in South
      Kensington.
    
UnderpinningResearch

    PAMELA is a laboratory for the assessment of pedestrian movement: how
      people react in pedestrian environments, under well-controlled laboratory
      conditions. The full-scale facility, which was funded by EPSRC from 2003,
      grew out of work conducted by Professor Nick Tyler (Chadwick Chair of
      Civil Engineering; UCL 1987-present) for the Department of the
      Environment, Transport and the Regions (DETR) in the mid-1990s. Tyler
      conducts research into person-environment interactions, from the
      macroscopic interactions within cities, transport and the built
      environment systems to the microscopic interactions between stimuli in the
      environment and the person's ability to manage the physical response.
    EXCALIBUR (1998-2000): Having observed that wheelchair users and
      older people could not board &#8212; and therefore did not use &#8212; new low-floor
      buses, Tyler developed the EPSRC-funded EXCALIBUR project to work out how
      to make these buses more accessible. A number of bus stops were
      constructed using a variety of kerb and surface technologies, and then
      tested for their effectiveness and ease of use by both drivers and
      passengers [1]. This research led Tyler to develop a specific set of
      design specifications for bus stops, allowing buses to stop at a maximum
      distance of around 50mm &#8212; rather than the more common 400-500mm &#8212; from the
      kerb [2].
    PAMELA (2003-present): By enabling buses to get much closer to the
      edge of the kerb, these new stop designs helped alleviate problems with
      access directly to buses. They did not, however, address the problem of
      how a disabled person might reach the bus stop in the first place over
      footways that were often uneven, badly designed and inaccessible. Tyler
      conceived PAMELA, a novel and highly flexible laboratory in which
      pedestrian infrastructure could be built, changed, tested, reconfigured,
      studied and their detailed design evaluated in terms of accessibility and
      usability for pedestrians with a wide range of mobility levels and access
      assistant requirements. The construction of the laboratory itself, which
      took place between 2003 and 2006, required extensive design work based on
      functional specifications by Tyler in relation to lighting facilities, and
      the development of a flexible floor surface that retained sufficiently
      stiff characteristics to be representative of ground conditions with
      interchangeable real surface materials such as concrete pavers, stone, and
      asphalt; could be tilted either as a whole surface or in part; and was
      able to include specific elements of the pedestrian infrastructure,
      including pedestrian crossings and bus stops, at full scale. He also
      developed specifications for a range of sensing equipment.
    Thameslink 2000 (2008-present): In 2008, early plans for the
      &#163;3.5bn Thameslink 2000 railway line project revealed potential
      incompatibility between the predicted level of demand and the proposed
      service frequency. The Department for Transport asked Tyler to construct a
      life-scale train carriage and station platform interface in the PAMELA
      facility in order to test the boarding and alighting performance of the
      proposed trains and passenger numbers [3]. The UCL team constructed a
      mock-up life-size half carriage to Siemens' specification for stock for
      the Thameslink 2000 project. The model had variable-width doors, moveable
      seating, and a station environment that could be varied in terms of
      platform heights. 150 participants were then recruited to board and alight
      the carriage under different loading, boarding and alighting conditions.
      Over 11,000 passenger movements were recorded. Various aspects were tested
      under the predicted load scenarios, including the distribution of
      passengers along the platforms in the four central London stations. The
      research found that the proposed demand would not be met by the proposed
      service frequency but that certain elements should be specified in the
      requirements for the new trains in the procurement process in order to
      minimise the problems. These specifications included door widths,
      vestibule design and specified platform heights at stations. Network Rail
      subsequently requested that UCL construct the train design being proposed
      by Siemens as the preferred bidder for the project's train design [4].
      Further work on passenger movements has been commissioned to run in
      November 2013.
    London Underground platform humps: In 2008 London Underground Ltd
      asked Tyler to use PAMELA to examine their proposed platform humps, raised
      sections of platform making it easier for wheelchair users, parents with
      buggies and passengers with luggage to board and alight Underground
      trains. In particular, Tyler was asked to evaluate potential safety issues
      relating to the humps, including the risk of wheelchairs rolling down the
      ramp onto the track, the likelihood of trains not stopping precisely, and
      the ease with which visually impaired people could use them. To that end,
      Tyler's team built a set of platform humps including multidirectional
      slopes at different gradients, surfaces and markings. Tests conducted in
      2008 with a variety of disabled research participants included evaluations
      of the ease of their access onto and off a `train floor' at different
      points on the gradients, and of whether or not proposed platform widths
      accommodated wheelchair manoeuvrability. This data was used in subsequent
      work between 2009 and 2010 to show that a time reduction of 3 seconds in
      the dwell time (the time the train is stationary in the station), which
      allowed the same train frequency with one fewer train, could be achieved
      by reducing the vertical gap between the train and the platform along the
      entire length of the platform [5],[6],[7].
    London Underground New Concept Deep Tube Train: In 2012/13, London
      Underground commissioned the laboratory to develop a mock-up train for
      their New Concept Deep Tube Train Programme. In this case, a life-size
      full tube train carriage was constructed according to the current
      conceptual design, but with passenger-facing innovations such as variable
      door widths, interchangeable seating and grab poles, and a station
      environment including variable platform heights and platform edge doors.
      This was then tested with 120 participants boarding and alighting under
      different loading conditions. [9]
    Tubelines Ltd (2009): Research carried out for Tubelines tested
      the feasibility of using portable ramps to enable wheelchair users to
      enter and leave tube trains. The work, which involved constructing a
      number of deep-tube mock-ups tested by wheelchair users and other
      participants, demonstrated that the proposed ramps were not appropriate,
      as the ramps took too long to deploy and were particularly challenging
      where the train floor is lower than the platform surface.
    Exhibition Road (2010-2011): In 2010, Guide Dogs for the Blind
      Association and Transport for London asked UCL to test a variety of
      horizontal warning systems for the kerb-free, single-surface shared road
      space in Exhibition Road, home to the Natural History Museum, Science
      Museum and Victoria &amp; Albert Museum. The Association was particularly
      concerned about the safety of a kerb- free, single-surface space shared by
      pedestrians and vehicles without segregation. The work carried out in
      PAMELA tested 54 different designs for tactile horizontal delineation
      intended to provide information to visually impaired people about the
      location of safe and less-safe areas within the shared space. These were
      tested with a sample of visually impaired people, wheelchair users,
      ambulant elderly people and others to determine which design should be
      used in the actual application. It found no clear winner, but showed that
      the existing `corduroy' surface might be usable for this purpose,
      recommending a width of 600mm [8].
    Other members of the team: Dr Taku Fujiyama (Lecturer at UCL since 2004);
      Dr Craig Childs (Research Associate at UCL, 2003-2013)
    