CaseStudyId: 34171
Title: 
    Enabling Zyvex Labs to develop atomically precise manufacturing processes
    

ImpactDetails

    Zyvex Labs is a leading company in the area of APM in the US. It is part
      of Zyvex Corporation, which carries out fundamental research into APM,
      often building its own tools. Zyvex now takes that technology to market by
      developing commercial products in the nanomaterials and nanomanipulation
      areas. The company has already developed a system that is in wide use
      throughout the semiconductor industry (a nanoprobe, used to characterise
      chips at 90nm and below); the UCL research has underpinned development of
      a new system to be brought to market around 2015. It has also helped
      generate new employment and $14 million in funding for the company [A].
    Zyvex Labs is developing techniques to create nanoscale patterns with
      atomic precision by manipulating hydrogen on Si(001), and then growing new
      material on top of the patterns. The company is developing products for
      market based on this patterning: control electronics for STMs, to allow
      patterning; and turn-key systems to be added to STMs, to give a complete
      patterning and growth system. Both of these systems will allow other
      companies to produce patterns in hydrogen-terminated Si(001) and grow new
      materials within the patterns.
    While developing early ideas for APM based on hydrogen lithography and
      subsequent growth, the President (at the time Chief Technical Officer
      followed by Vice President) of Zyvex Labs realised the importance of
      theoretical underpinning for the process. He writes, "I did an extensive
      literature search on the subject. Your theoretical work stood out as the
      best available data and in excellent agreement with the published
      experimental data" [A]. Zyvex Labs and UCL set up a collaboration, under a
      non-disclosure agreement, in May 2007.
    UCL's data on hydrogen diffusion and epitaxial growth of silicon improved
      Zyvex Labs' development process by giving important limits on the
      atomically precise process being developed: during the early stages of
      development, in early 2008, it indicated that the approach was feasible;
      later, it was used to identify the temperatures at which hydrogen becomes
      mobile, which were used to control and manage the growth processes [A].
      This last point is particularly important: the growth of new silicon
      requires elevated temperatures, and so the atomically precise control
      would be impossible without UCL's data on the temperatures at which the
      hydrogen mask would degrade. The UCL research findings in section 2 were
      therefore used to set maximum annealing and growth temperatures for the
      APM process, to ensure fidelity of patterns. As Zyvex Labs' entire process
      and hence product relies on control of the position of the atoms on the
      surface, the UCL results underpin its approach, and hence the products
      that are being brought to market. The President writes: "Further, your
      research on hydrogen mobility on silicon and epitaxial growth of silicon
      is still very relevant and is referenced on a very regular basis as we are
      carrying out this research" [A].
    In addition to underpinning Zyvex Labs' approach, the UCL research has
      helped the consortium led by Zyvex Labs to obtain just over $14 million in
      funding between January 2008 and July 2013 [A]. This consists of two
      research contracts from the US Defense Advanced Research Projects Agency
      and a matching grant from the State of Texas, awarded to enable the
      accelerated commercialisation and market adoption of atomically precise
      devices and manufacturing approaches. These contracts started in August
      2008 and have resulted in the hiring of at least five new employees at
      Zyvex Labs, including one of the original experimentalists from Oxford
      [A]. The UCL research underpinned the funding as it enabled Zyvex Labs'
      development of atomically precise processes, which in turn allowed the
      contracts to be awarded. The President of Zyvex Labs writes that UCL's
      "work on the mobility of hydrogen on silicon surfaces has been enormously
      influential on the research at Zyvex Labs and the funding of that
      research" and that the funding was "made possible in no small measure by
      your research" [A].
    In 2013, UCL research has also been informing the approaches used by
      Zyvex Labs in a new area: the development of manufacturing techniques for
      quantum computing devices. This process will use hydrogen depassivation to
      deposit dopant atoms with atomic precision, and Zyvex Labs is using the
      recent UCL research on the electronic structure of dopants on silicon
      surfaces to understand the effects of physical structure on dopant
      properties and hence to design the devices [A]. [text removed for
      publication]
    
ImpactSummary

    The underpinning research involved modelling the diffusion of hydrogen on
      silicon surfaces, and the electronic structure of dopant atoms on silicon
      surfaces. This data was used to inform, guide and develop the atomically
      precise manufacturing processes of Zyvex Labs. These processes remove
      hydrogen atoms from a silicon surface to create patterns with atomic
      precision for later overgrowth. As a result of the UCL research, Zyvex
      Labs has already obtained funding of $14 million, several jobs have been
      created, and at least two products are being brought to market.
    
UnderpinningResearch

    Techniques for atomically precise manufacturing (APM) &#8212; the fabrication
      of structures with the precision of one atom &#8212; are of interest to
      industry. APM will enable industry to develop new technology ranging from
      simple quantum dots and atomically accurate metrology standards, to
      devices for the harvesting and storage of energy and for medical
      applications. One method of achieving APM involves the growth of
      structures on the Si(001) surface. A layer of hydrogen on this surface
      acts as a mask against deposition of further material, so selective
      removal of hydrogen atoms from the layer enables the selective deposition
      of new material such as silicon and germanium, as well as dopant atoms for
      quantum computing devices. The process becomes more complicated, however,
      if elevated temperatures are required for growth of the new material,
      since this can also cause hydrogen to diffuse about the surface, reducing
      the efficiency of the method. The behaviour of hydrogen on the Si(001)
      surface has therefore become an area of considerable importance, both
      industrially and academically.
    UCL research into the behaviour of hydrogen on Si surfaces has been
      conducted by David Bowler who joined the Department of Physics and
      Astronomy at UCL in July 1998. This research was part of a collaboration
      that started whilst Bowler was at Oxford University and continued when he
      moved to Keele University and then to UCL. The first key UCL contribution
      (1998-2000) was part of an extensive joint experimental-theoretical
      investigation with Oxford University of the behaviour of hydrogen on
      Si(001) under various conditions [1]. In this work, researchers from
      Oxford University conducted the experimental work, which consisted of
      elevated-temperature scanning tunnelling microscope (STM) measurements of
      hydrogen mobility, and UCL's Bowler conducted the theoretical work, which
      involved modelling the diffusion barrier for hydrogen on Si(001), both on
      the perfect surface and near step edges and defects. This modelling of
      hydrogen diffusion gave a comprehensive picture of the energy surface,
      including the diffusion barriers and the associated temperatures at which
      hydrogen becomes mobile.
    The next contribution (2001-2003) was performed entirely at UCL and was
      relevant both to diffusion of hydrogen and growth of new silicon on
      Si(001) [2]. This research involved modelling the formation of new Si
      dimers during growth and hydrogen diffusion associated with this process.
      Later research (2010-2012) performed by PDRA Veronika Brazdova and
      supervised by Bowler consisted of modelling the electronic structure of
      Si(110) [3], and understanding the diffusion of hydrogen on Si(110) [4]
      and around a Si(001)/Si(110) corner. The key findings of this research
      [1-4] hat underpinned the impact were the diffusion barriers for hydrogen
      on silicon surfaces, both on the perfect surface and near defects and
      steps.
    More recently, UCL researchers have studied the effects of physical
      structure on the electronic structure of dopant atoms on silicon surfaces
      [5, 6]. The research involved STM experiments and density functional
      theory (DFT) modelling of dopants on Si(111) [5] and Si(001) [6], and was
      performed from 2009 to 2013 entirely within UCL. The effect of the
      physical structure of the dopants on their electronic properties has been
      found to lead to very different properties to the standard bulk behaviour:
      on Si(111), Bi has been found to act as both an electron donor and an
      electron acceptor, while on Si(001), Bi has been found to form a
      spin-polarised, local state when coupled with a vacancy. These properties
      have major implications for the design and construction of quantum
      information devices built using APM, dopant atoms and silicon surfaces.
    Key UCL researchers: David Bowler (PDRA 1998-1999; EPSRC
      Postdoctoral Fellow 1999-2001; Royal Society University Research Fellow
      2001-2009; Lecturer 2002-2006; Reader 2006-present), Veronika Brazdova
      (PDRA 2006-present) and the UCL STM experimental group (K. Iwaya, P.
      Studer, S.R. Schofield, C. F. Hirjibehedin and G. Aeppli).
    