CaseStudyId: 34172
Title: 
    Enabling space companies to deliver contracts and supporting growth of
      the space sector
    

ImpactDetails

    The commercial space sector is highly internationalised; within Europe,
      it is dominated by multinational prime contractors (including EADS
      Astrium, which has a major UK presence in Astrium UK). The current annual
      contract value of satellite and support system builds in the UK is around
      &#163;1 billion. Around half of the European upstream space sector serves the
      production (under contract) of world-class science satellites devoted to
      space science and earth observation. These contracts, worth hundreds of
      millions of pounds, provide revenue and employment but also, more
      importantly, underpin the growth of the civil space sector
      (telecommunications, GPS etc.) through transfer of technology and
      personnel. This symbiotic relationship has been widely recognised; for
      example, in the UK Space Innovation and Growth Strategy (IGS) [A] and the
      UK Space Agency Civil Space Strategy [B]. The IGS was published in 2010
      and is the outcome of a major UK government initiative. It provides a
      framework for space sector government support and investment up to 2030,
      and recognises the strength of the UK space sector. Amongst other things,
      it defines an approach that will see the UK's share of the world space
      market increase to 10% by 2020, and it anticipates the creation of 100,000
      jobs [A]. MSSL's role in the space sector has included the provision, in a
      competitive marketplace, of essential skills and technologies as part of
      major satellite procurements, thereby enabling growth.
    UCL researcher Alan Smith is a member of the National Space Technology
      Steering Group (NSTSG), which was set up in 2010 after publication of the
      IGS. In 2011, the NSTSG created technology roadmaps (updated in 2012) [C]
      that have become the basis for national investment in space technology.
      Smith also contributed to the 2013 `Restack' of the IGS, particularly in
      the area of bilateral programmes and their value to the UK economy, and
      presented on this topic to the UK community at the UK Space Conference in
      Glasgow in July 2013. These contributions and presentations are
      underpinned by a profound understanding of the issues associated with the
      development of space hardware and the link between space science and its
      enabling technology, which has been built up whilst conducting the
      research described in section 2.
    Research conducted within MSSL has also had an impact on the space
      companies European Astrium Aerospace and Canadian Routes AstroEngineering,
      which hold contracts with space agencies &#8212; including the European Space
      Agency (ESA) &#8212; for the supply and testing of equipment that will form part
      of satellites or space probes. Astrium and Routes in turn contracted out
      this work to MSSL, whose extensive prior research into the development and
      testing of space equipment enabled it to successfully meet the
      requirements of the space companies. MSSL's contribution therefore enabled
      Astrium and Routes to fulfil their contracts to the space agencies.
    The research programmes and insights described in section 2 gave MSSL the
      background, expertise and track record to win the contracts with Astrium
      and Routes through competitive tender, evidencing the value of the
      underpinning research to these companies. The scientific background of
      MSSL staff also allows the response to the customer's requirements to be
      interpreted to the best advantage of the customer; issues can be
      identified in the specifications that would not necessarily be noted by
      another contractor without MSSL's scientific and space engineering
      heritage.
    Astrium: Impacts on Astrium involved three contracts within the
      REF impact period to supply or test equipment for two scheduled space
      missions: the NASA/ESA James Webb Space Telescope (JWST, the replacement
      for the Hubble Space Telescope), due to be launched in 2018; and Gaia
      (ESA's next generation astrometry mission to map the Galaxy), due to be
      launched in late 2013.
    The JWST work involved the building of equipment for both on-board
      calibration (the Calibration Assembly, or CAA) and ground testing
      (Calibration Light Source and Optical Alignment equipment) of the
      telescope's NIRSpec instrument, which is being built by the German arm of
      Astrium. Two CAA units were built for Astrium by MSSL, where previous
      extensive research into space instrument development (including
      development of NIRSpec itself) allowed staff to understand fully the
      scientific requirements and develop the instruments successfully. The CAA
      is an example of an instrument for which MSSL was able to provide industry
      with specialist expertise in inflight, stable, optical calibration that
      was not otherwise available. UCL won the contract in part because of this
      expertise, which significantly reduced the risk to Astrium of late or
      inferior delivery of the instrument. Astrium took delivery of the
      equipment in February 2010, enabling them to then successfully deliver two
      flight-capable CAA units to ESA [D].
    The Calibration Light Source and Optical Alignment equipment are two
      separate instruments (a calibrated infra-red light source and a
      computer-controlled optical alignment and measurement system) used for
      testing NIRSpec before launch. They were also built by MSSL, underpinned
      by previous research on the development of optical systems and test
      facilities (e.g. [1], [2]) for space missions as well as research on
      NIRSpec. Again, UCL research results (including novel calibration
      technologies) were vital for Astrium to be able to provide ESA with
      successful working equipment, as Astrium had developed complex equipment
      requirements that other industrial bidders were not able to meet. Astrium
      took delivery of the equipment in December 2009 [D]. These two UCL
      contracts on NIRSpec [text removed for publication] played a role in
      allowing Astrium to meet the terms of its contract with ESA [text removed
      for publication] [D].
    The Gaia work involved the testing and integration of over 100 CCDs and
      their associated electronics for the Gaia mission, which is being built by
      the French arm of Astrium. This work was underpinned by previous MSSL
      research involving both the development of the Gaia instrument concept [4]
      and the integration and testing of CCD-based camera systems (e.g. for the
      XMM [1], Integral and Hinode [2] missions). The extensive research and
      experience of MSSL in this area resulted in properly tested CCD units
      being delivered to ESA by Astrium, and provided Astrium with validated
      test results that were acceptable to ESA [F]. Astrium took delivery of the
      final tested units in May 2011, helping it to meet the terms of its
      contract with ESA [F], which had a value of &#8364;317 million [G]. [text
      removed for publication]
    Routes AstroEngineering: Impact on the Canadian Routes space
      company involved one contract within the REF impact period with the Indian
      government to supply equipment for the Indian Astrosat mission, due to be
      launched in 2014. MSSL built the high voltage power supplies for
      Astrosat's UV telescope, equipment that will support the image
      intensifiers that detect UV radiation from astronomical objects under
      study; Routes took delivery of this equipment in September 2009 [H].
      MSSL's previous research on the development of high voltage power supplies
      (e.g. [1], [5]) ensured that Routes was able to deliver appropriate
      equipment that met the requirements set by the Indian government. If MSSL
      had not conducted this underpinning research into the development of novel
      power supplies and therefore become one of the few organisations with
      design heritage from previous projects, Routes would likely have had to
      initiate a high-risk (due to reduced expertise) development at another
      organisation [H]. The value of the UCL contract was &#163;417,000 [I].
    
ImpactSummary

    UCL's research and development programme in space science and engineering
      enabled it to complete four major contracts with European and Canadian
      space companies between 2009 and 2011. These contracts were for the supply
      of equipment that will fly on European and Indian space missions, and for
      support of the ground testing of those space missions. The fact that these
      contracts were won by UCL in a competitive environment against low-cost
      industrial providers demonstrates that customers value the capability that
      UCL possesses. By acting as a specialist provider within the UK space
      sector supply chain, UCL enabled the prime contractors European Astrium
      Aerospace and Canadian Routes AstroEngineering Ltd. to deliver substantial
      commercial contracts with space agencies. Its provision of specialist
      input into these major contracts enabled UCL to also directly support the
      growth of the commercial space sector.
    
UnderpinningResearch

    The Department of Space and Climate Physics (also known as the Mullard
      Space Science Laboratory, or MSSL) at UCL has built up expertise in space
      science from its 40 years of space programmes. Major contributions to this
      research since 1993 include:
    The development of instrumentation for use on spacecraft: A
      primary function of MSSL is to design and build space instruments and
      associated on-board software to meet the scientific objectives set by the
      investigators. The development of such instrumentation involves a platform
      of research both in the subject area of the science mission (such as
      astrophysics) and the instrumentation necessary to deliver new science.
      Research outcomes included successful system designs, and mechanical and
      electronic designs for space; fabrication, test and calibration of many
      instruments; and a full engineering understanding of science requirements
      [1-4]. Particular insights involved the trade-off of various noise sources
      that contributed to the ultimate performance of a microchannel-based
      detector (the XMM mission, launched in 1999 [1]), and the lifetime
      estimation of electron and ion detectors in systems operating in the
      Earth's magnetosphere (the Cluster mission, launched in 2000). This
      programme of research involved the following key UCL researchers and space
      missions/instruments: Prof. Culhane (SOHO, 1995), Prof. Johnstone (Polar,
      1996), Prof. Coates (Cassini, 1997), Prof. Mason (XMM, 1999 [1]; Swift,
      2006), Prof. Fazakerley (Cluster, 2000; Double Star, 2004), Prof. Smith
      (Integral, 2002), Prof. Harra (Hinode, 2006 [2]), Prof. Page (Herschel,
      2009) and Prof. Cropper (NIRSpec for JWST, 2000; Gaia, due for launch late
      2013 [3]). For brevity only the lead scientists are shown in the above
      list.
    Development of high voltage power supplies for multiple science
        instruments: High voltage supplies are integral to a number of
      detectors used in space science, particularly image intensifiers (for
      example, those used on the satellites XMM, launched in 1999, and Swift,
      launched in 2004) and particle detector microchannel plates (for example,
      those used on the satellites Cluster, launched in 2000, and Double Star,
      launched in 2004). MSSL has developed the capability to design and build
      bespoke high voltage power supplies to meet the requirements of industrial
      customers; for example, it built the power supply for the XMM mission that
      was launched in 1999 [1]. Important advancements included making the
      supplies small, lightweight, and power efficient; and the development of
      supplies that can very rapidly sweep across wide voltage values, which is
      required for key applications such as particle detectors for missions to
      Saturn and the Sun, the energy/time cadence of which depends critically on
      the sweep rate. Key UCL researchers were Jim Bowles (Head of Electronics
      Group, 1990-1997) and Phil Guttridge (Head of Electronics Group,
      1997-present).
    Development of novel test facilities for multiple science missions:
      All items of equipment for space instruments have to be calibrated under
      vacuum, while being illuminated with light or stimulated with charged
      particles to demonstrate their function. The high accuracy of the required
      calibration needs a close understanding of the physics of the stimulating
      radiation and the design needed to achieve that; for example,
      high-accuracy optical flat fields and electron/proton beams.
    Additionally, the temperature of the equipment has to be varied across a
      wide range to show that it has been built correctly and is able to
      maintain the correct performance in the harsh conditions in space. To
      achieve these aims, MSSL has developed many specialist test systems that
      were designed or adapted for individual mission requirements and has
      developed the capability to respond to the needs of industrial customers.
      An evolving programme of development has been in place since before 1993
      and has included the commissioning of specialist facilities for Cluster
      (~1995) and CCD (charge coupled device) based missions (e.g. Integral
      ~1998). Calibration facilities require traceability to national standards
      and extremely accurate characterisation. In general, the physical
      processes associated with the facility have to be understood at least as
      well as the instrumentation that is being calibrated, and so such
      developments have required modelling and model verification. For instance,
      when the Cassini instrument required a stable ion beam in 1995, UCL
      researchers modelled magnetic field distortion within a thermal vacuum
      chamber [4], together with the development of magnetic shielding
      provisions and beam monitors.
    