CaseStudyId: 34176
Title: 
    Enabling SEMATECH and industrial member companies to improve their
      transistor technology
    

ImpactDetails

    Knowledge transfer between UCL and industry has enabled technological
      developments in the
      microelectronics industry, including the employment of HfO2 in
      new products. This has been
      facilitated by UCL contracts with SEMATECH (SMT), a non-profit,
      world-leading technology
      research and development consortium, which includes several of the world's
      biggest microchip
      manufacturers &#8212; IBM, Intel, TSMC, Samsung and GlobalFoundries &#8212; as full
      members, and over 40
      other semiconductors-related companies as associated members. The
      consortium works to
      accelerate the development of the advanced manufacturing technologies that
      will be needed to
      build more powerful semiconductor devices. Contracts with research
      consortiums such as SMT are
      vital for university research groups to be able to contribute to the
      development of new technology
      and secure impact in the microelectronics industry.
    Research findings from the Shluger group at UCL, along with those from
      many other research
      groups, are collated by SMT and presented by them to their member
      companies on a regular basis
      via confidential reports. Member companies then make use of these
      findings, together with their
      own in-house research, to enable technological developments and new
      devices such as improved
      transistors. Due to the highly confidential nature of this industry it is
      impossible to deduce which
      particular research findings are implemented by the member companies in
      their improved devices;
      however, the fact that UCL research has been continuously financially
      supported by the industry
      (via its research consortium) since 2004 constitutes an unambiguous proof
      of its practical
      significance. The UCL results and analysis - and process modifications
      based on these results &#8212; contained
      in SMT's confidential reports have also been consistently highly evaluated
      by the
      member companies [A]. Industry's high valuation of the research presented
      to it by SMT, including
      that from UCL, also ensures that the consortium is able to keep operating
      [A].
    Since 2004, the Shluger group has been actively involved in three major
      programmes at SMT. For
      each of these programmes, the UCL research described in section 2 has
      helped SMT to meet their
      obligations to their member companies by providing them with important
      insights, which they were
      able to pass on. The particular impacts described below all took place
      after 1 January 2008 [B].
    One programme was the development of the next generation of gate
      dielectrics, the so-called
      higher-k dielectrics, intended for transistor devices with an effective
      oxide thickness (EOT) of less
      than 0.5nm (required by the International Technology Roadmap for
      Semiconductors). Scaling the
      transistor size helps to increase their packing density and improve
      performance and power
      consumption of microchips. The UCL group provided an understanding of the
      material properties
      responsible for the HfO2 dielectric constant, which enabled SMT
      to fabricate and demonstrate
      transistors with an EOT of 0.49nm [B]. The understanding of the origin and
      structure of defects in
      HfO2 and at Si/HfO2 interfaces developed by the
      Shluger group also provided the way to minimise
      the negative impact of these defects by modifying processing conditions;
      SMT confirmed that the
      proposal made in the UCL work to apply the post-deposition anneal using
      ammonia improved
      device transconductance and reduced device threshold voltage instability.
      Additionally, the UCL
      group's determination of the size of the electron traps enabled the
      thickness of the HfO2 layer to be
      scaled down to below 2.5nm, drastically reducing the instability [A].
    Another programme involved the development of advanced non-volatile
      memory, based on a well-controlled
      and highly repeatable change of the dielectric resistivity rather than on
      a conventional
      electron storage technology. SMT reported that: "Calculations of the
      sub-stoichiometric poly-crystalline
      dielectric structures performed by Prof. Shluger's group allowed to
      pinpoint that the
      grain boundaries are the critical morphological material properties which
      define the resistive
      switching paths. Furthermore, Prof. Shluger's study identified atomic
      characteristics of the oxygen
      vacancies at the grain boundaries and their kinetic, which played a
      critical role in resistive
      switching process. Based on these findings, SMT was able to optimize the
      material properties and
      fabricate high performance memory devices meeting the project objectives"
      [B]. They added that
      "the UCL contribution is highly valuable" for this programme [B].
    The third programme involved the mechanisms of dielectric degradation,
      which, to a great degree,
      determines overall device reliability. The UCL group's research provided
      an atomic-level
      description of the defect generation process in the SiO2
      dielectric when subjected to electrical
      stress. This research finding was employed by SMT to develop a model
      capable of estimating the
      device lifetime, which received high evaluation by member companies [B].
    All of the important insights above were communicated by SMT to their
      member companies and,
      together with contributions from many other research groups, have enabled
      technological
      developments in the microelectronics industry, including the employment of
      HfO2 in new products.
    For example, in 2009, Intel released a new 32nm microchip [C] that uses
      the hafnium-based
      dielectric [A]. This was an improvement on its 45nm microchip released in
      2007, which was the first
      technology node to use the new high-k dielectric material. To enable
      production of the 32nm
      technology, modifications were mostly made to the device architecture and
      sizes, improvements
      that were underpinned by research including that conducted by the Shluger
      group. For example,
      the EOT of the high-k dielectric was reduced from 1.0nm in the 45nm
      technology to 0.9nm in the
      32nm technology [C]. Further technological improvements enabled Intel to
      release in 2011 the
      even smaller 22nm transistor technology [D], which also uses the
      hafnium-based dielectric [A].
      Other companies &#8212; IBM, TSMC, Samsung and GlobalFoundries &#8212; now also make
      use of the
      hafnium-based dielectric in their microchip technologies.
    
ImpactSummary

    Researchers within the Department of Physics and Astronomy at UCL have
      investigated the
      properties of defects in bulk HfO2 and at Si/SiOx/HfO2
      interfaces. Results have been used by an
      industrial partner, SEMATECH (SMT), to improve the quality and reliability
      of high-performance
      microelectronic devices based on transistors. This has helped SMT to meet
      project objectives on
      behalf of member companies such as Intel and IBM, and UCL research results
      have been
      consistently highly evaluated by these companies. Recommendations made by
      SMT have been
      implemented by industrial partners in their currently manufactured
      devices, such as the 22nm
      process technology released by Intel in 2011.
    
UnderpinningResearch

    Since 2001, researchers in the Department of Physics and Astronomy at UCL
      have been
      investigating how to improve reliability and minimise energy loss in
      transistors for the
      microelectronics industry.
    Transistors are the fundamental building blocks for all computer chips.
      Over the last 15 years, the
      microelectronics industry has used silicon dioxide (SiO2) to
      produce seven logic-process
      generations of transistors, and transistor size has decreased with each
      generation. However, as
      transistors shrink, leakage current increases, limiting computer processor
      performance and
      increasing energy consumption. Managing that leakage current is crucial
      for reliable high-speed
      operation, and is becoming an increasingly important factor in chip design
      and the reduction of
      power consumption. The semiconductor industry is also struggling with the
      heat of chips, which
      increases exponentially as the number of transistors on a chip increases.
      Controlling leakage
      current by using new high dielectric constant (high-k) materials instead
      of SiO2 is one of many
      steps towards making sure that scaling of devices continues and ever
      smaller transistors run
      reliably.
    High-k dielectrics, such as hafnium dioxide (HfO2) and hafnium
      silicates, have been in the spotlight
      of both scientists and engineers over the last ten years as substitutes
      for SiO2 as the gate dielectric
      in metal-oxide semiconductor field-effect transistors (MOSFETs). However,
      defects and electron
      trapping in the dielectric layer of these devices lead to the degradation
      of their performance and
      reliability, hampering implementation of these dielectrics in a
      manufacturing environment.
    UCL research in this area focused on modelling defects and their
      properties in bulk HfO2 and at
      Si/SiOx/HfO2 interfaces. The research during
      2001-2007 involved using a wide range of
      computational methods for modelling defects in insulators [1-3]. The
      research carried out in 2008-2011
      was concerned with the interaction of these defects with grain boundaries
      in polycrystalline
      HfO2 and their effects on the leakage current and breakdown of
      devices [4, 5]. The embedded
      cluster method developed at UCL allowed modelling of the electronic
      structure and spectroscopic
      properties of defects in high-k oxides with the high accuracy required for
      predicting their properties.
      UCL researchers were able to identify specific defects in polycrystalline
      oxide films and at
      interfaces by comparing their predicted optical, electron trapping and EPR
      (electron paramagnetic
      resonance) spectroscopy properties, and the predicted positions of their
      electronic energy levels,
      with experimental data.
    Findings of the research included the determination that oxygen vacancies
      in these oxides can
      capture up to five electrons. It was also found that these defects can be
      effectively passivated by
      H2N groups, suggesting that an application of an ammonia
      post-deposition anneal would be more
      effective than the conventional N2 ambient [2]. This helped to
      resolve the concern that extremely
      high defect density in this material made it unsuitable for high-volume
      production. In addition, the
      size of the electron traps (the electron localisation area) was found to
      be in the order of 1nm (the
      electron was found to be spread over three nearby Hf atoms) [1, 3]. UCL
      researchers also
      determined characteristics of the oxygen vacancies at the grain boundaries
      in monoclinic HfO2 and
      their diffusion paths [4, 5].
    Key UCL researchers: A. Shluger (Principal Research Fellow
      1999-2002; Reader 2002-2004;
      Professor 2004-present), A. M. Stoneham (Professor 1995-2006; Emeritus
      Professor 2006-2011),
      J. L. Gavartin (Research Fellow 1998-2005; Senior Research Fellow
      2005-2007), D. Mu&#241;oz-Ramo
      (Research Associate 2004-2008), P. V. Sushko (Research Associate
      2001-2004; Senior Research
      Associate 2005-2009; Lecturer 2009-2012; Reader 2012-present) and K. P.
      McKenna (Research
      Associate 2005-2009; Senior Research Associate 2009-2011).
    This research was funded by the EU FP6 programme, EPSRC and by SMT (TX,
      USA). It was
      carried out in close collaboration with SMT, the leading R&amp;D
      consortium in this area, who provided
      the experimental data on the electrical characterisation of devices and
      spectroscopic defect
      properties. Collaboration with SMT was coordinated by Dr. G. Bersuker and
      Dr. B. H. Lee. Prof. A.
      Shluger was a visiting professor at SMT in 2009. Researchers in Dept.
      Enginyeria Electr&#242;nica,
      Universitat Aut&#242;noma de Barcelona provided the Conductive Atomic Force
      Microscopy
      measurements used in reference [5].
    