CaseStudyId: 34180
Title: 
    Supporting e2v Ltd. in developing capability as a supplier for major
      space science missions
    

ImpactDetails

    The primary beneficiary of the research described in section 2 is MSSL's
      collaborator on much of the work: e2v Ltd. e2v is a UK company that
      develops a range of innovative technologies including CCDs. It employs
      1,600 people, roughly a third of whom are scientists and engineers, and
      has annual sales of around $370 million. The MSSL research has underpinned
      improved performance of e2v within the REF impact period; it has enabled
      the company to win major contracts, led to improvements in its CCD
      technology, and enhanced its standing in the space market. e2v's Chief
      Engineer (Imaging Applications) confirmed the importance of UCL's work to
      the company: "the e2v relationship with MSSL and UCL has been one of the
      foundations of our space science imaging business" [A].
    The development of new generations of CCDs is an expensive affair,
      costing millions of pounds, yet cannot be left to chance once a future
      space programme is selected. e2v tends to undertake new device
      developments under contract from customer organisations (rather than fund
      such developments fully themselves). Prior to selection it is necessary to
      first demonstrate the science performance and reliability of devices.
      MSSL's engagement with e2v and assistance in areas such as this &#8212; in
      addition to their joint research with e2v on prior space missions &#8212; has
      enabled the company to secure two major contracts with ESA that have been
      active within the REF impact period: a &#8364;20 million contract (2007 to 2011)
      for the supply of CCDs for the Gaia mission, due to be launched in late
      2013; and a &#8364;10 million contract (2012 to 2016) for the supply of CCDs for
      the visible (VIS) instrument on the Euclid mission, due to be launched in
      2020 [A]. Gaia and Euclid will include the largest and second largest CCD
      focal planes ever built for space, with 109 and 36 CCDs respectively. The
      success of both missions is critically dependent on the performance of the
      CCDs, since their main data product is the output of these devices.
      Interpretation of the CCD signals therefore delivers the primary mission
      objectives.
    MSSL's engagement and work with e2v has also enhanced the company's
      standing in the competitive space market, and has assisted them in
      becoming Europe's dominant and preferred supplier of CCDs for space
      science applications [B]. Indeed, the track record that the research has
      helped e2v to secure is unrivalled. This enhanced reputation and improved
      ability to secure contracts was recognised by the company's Chief
      Engineer, who, speaking about the impact of the joint Gaia mission
      research on the Euclid contract and other business activities, said: "The
      supply of custom CCDs to the Gaia mission is still the largest space
      contract that we have won [...] and the support of MSSL in making this
      mission feasible is of course significant. The capability that this
      experience has built at e2v now makes it possible for us to be a credible
      supplier to the next ESA science missions. For example, we have recently
      won a contract for &#8364;10M for supply of CCDs to the Euclid VIS instrument
      [text removed for publication]" [A].
    The influence of MSSL research on the success of e2v is further
      emphasised by the Chief Engineer, who praises "the strong technical
      liaison between yourselves and the Lockheed Martin Solar Physics group,
      which enabled us to supply CCDs into several programmes from SXI on GOES,
      to all of the Hinode instruments, the HMI and AIA instruments on the Solar
      Dynamics Observatory, and has built both our experience and reputation for
      Solar Imaging such that we have also been able to address other
      opportunities such as IRIS (the Interface Region Imaging Spectrometer),
      STEREO, and SUVI [text removed for publication]" [A]. This liaison
      comprised collaborative CCD research and was manifest in part in a joint
      publication (reference [3] in section 3).
    In addition to enhancing e2v's reputation and helping them to secure
      large contracts, the symbiotic relationship between the company and MSSL
      has led to an improved understanding at e2v of mission science
      requirements and their implications for CCD design. The Chief Engineer
      said: "the insights that the MSSL team have brought to us on the mission
      science requirements and how these translate into CCD performance needs
      have enabled us to better understand how we can design and optimise our
      detectors for particular applications. This insight has been invaluable in
      allowing us to address other customers with similar requirements, being
      able to offer solutions rather than simply asking questions. In this high
      technology marketplace this is a very strong selling point." [A]
    
ImpactSummary

    Research conducted within the Department of Space and Climate Physics at
      UCL has had a significant impact upon e2v Ltd., a manufacturer of
      charge-coupled devices (CCDs). Through working collaboratively with e2v,
      UCL has helped the company to secure major contracts and business [text
      removed for publication]. This includes two contracts for the supply of
      CCDs for the European Space Agency (ESA) missions Gaia (&#8364;20 million) and
      Euclid (&#8364;10 million). Furthermore, the symbiotic relationship has
      contributed to the establishment of e2v as Europe's leading supplier of
      high-quality CCDs for space science applications and has underpinned an
      improved understanding of device design and optimisation within the
      company.
    
UnderpinningResearch

    The Department of Space and Climate Physics (also known as the Mullard
      Space Science Laboratory, or MSSL) at UCL includes an Instrument Science
      Group that develops high-specification cameras for use on scientific
      spacecraft and undertakes fundamental research in the field of imaging
      sensors, including CCDs. CCDs are optical sensors that take the form of a
      two-dimensional pixelated array. They have revolutionised the acquisition
      of image information; for example, modern digital cameras are based on
      devices of this kind. The success of scientific applications is often
      critically dependent on the precise response of CCDs in their expected
      environment; for space science applications, this environment is a
      satellite operating in the harsh conditions of space.
    Since 1995, the MSSL group has worked closely with CCD manufacturer e2v
      Ltd. on a programme of CCD characterisation and modelling [1-6]. This
      partnership typically involves the detailed design and manufacture of CCDs
      by e2v, followed by the scientific evaluation and characterisation of the
      devices in specialist facilities at MSSL. This characterisation is within
      the context of performance and process models, and includes aspects such
      as noise sources and electron mobility, diffusion and loss. Test data are
      simulated and interpreted to quantify underlying device properties, and
      device performance is estimated. The models that are used have been either
      developed at MSSL or adapted from those in the published literature. The
      results and evaluations from the research at MSSL then go on to inform
      e2v's next generation of devices and their optimal use. The programme has
      so far involved the characterisation of more than 250 of e2v's CCDs.
    The collaborative studies function within a virtuous circle, in which
      research insights relating to the improvement of CCDs are shared, and
      understanding builds from project to project. Insights that have resulted
      from the programme of research are in areas including the physical
      processes of the devices, such as electron mobility and diffusion, noise
      sources, linearity, electron loss mechanisms, sensitivity, temperature
      dependence and set voltage dependence; camera design optimisation; device
      specification; and CCD data interpretation (calibration) during data
      analysis. For example, the MSSL group showed how linearity of response
      could be increased beyond full-well capacity through pixel integration,
      and the point spread function dependency on wavelength gave insight into
      the electron diffusion in the drift region of the CCDs.
    Much of this CCD research was conducted as part of studies of future
      space mission concepts, of which there are many more than actual space
      missions, due to the way that technical risk is mitigated and selections
      are made. Such studies are very comprehensive and are often competitive
      against other mission concepts. These collaborative CCD studies were
      conducted between 1996 and 2002 for the space mission Integral, which was
      launched in 2002 [1, 2]; in 1999 and 2000 for the GOES Solar X-ray Imager
      (SXI) [3]; in the early 2000s for the planned space mission Eddington [4,
      5]; in the mid 2000s for the FPP (Focal Plane Package) and EIS
      (Extreme-Ultraviolet Imaging Spectrometer) [6] instruments on the space
      mission Hinode, which was launched in 2006; from the late 2000s to the
      present time for the current space missions Gaia and Euclid; and for a
      number of other space missions. Often a customer that was an expert in
      detector technology was also involved, working with MSSL to optimise
      mission performance (for example, Lockheed Martin for GOES SXI [3] and
      Hinode FPP; and ESA for Eddington [4, 5], Euclid and Gaia).
    For actual flight missions the emphasis was on device specification,
      device characterisation, identifying optimal operating conditions,
      screening and preparation for exploitation. Important developments that
      have formed part of this work include the examination of back illumination
      in CCDs that had been thinned to create extreme ultraviolet sensitivity,
      and the evaluation of novel concept L3CCDs (a new type of CCD) as a
      potential mission device for Gaia.
    The table below lists a number of studies that MSSL has been involved
      with and that have led to improved understanding of CCDs.
    
      
        
          Project start-end
          Prime contractor
          Number of CCDs
          Comment
        
        
          Integral flight camera
		  1996-2002(launch)
          European Space Agency contract
          5
          References [1] and [2].
        
        
          GOES SXI
            1999-2000
          Lockheed Martin (US) contract
          55
          Multiple satellites in the GOES series. Reference [3].
        
        
          Hinode EIS
            2003-2006(launch)
          PPARC grant
          8
          Reference [6].
        
        
          Hinode FPP
            2003-2006(launch)
          Lockheed Martin (US) contract
          36
          Direct result of GOES SXI project.
        
        
          Eddington prototype
		  2004-2005
          ESA contract
          4
          References [4] and [5].
        
        
          Gaia
            2007-2010
          ESA and STFC grant
          around 150 (including all flight devices)
          Helped secure Gaia selection as an ESA mission.
        
        
          Plato study
            2008-2011
          UK Space Agency grant
          0
          Followed Eddington study. Several initial devices manufactured for
            ESA. Prototype readout electronics designed and built at MSSL. MSSL
            contributed to the devices&#8217; specification.
        
        
          Euclid study
            2008-present
          ESA and STFC
          5 to date
          Helped secure Euclid selection as an ESA mission.
        
        
          Moses 2004
          STFC grant
          7
          Part of the evaluation of a novel far UV spectral imager that flew
            on a sounding rocket.
        
        
          Back illuminated CCDs 2003
          PPARC grant
          5
          Enhanced the group&#8217;s understanding of a particular device
            configuration: charge diffusion and point spread function in
            back-thinned devices.
        
        
          L3CCDs for Gaia 2004-2005
          ESA
          5
          Part of Gaia pre-selection evaluation.
        
      
    
    Key UCL researchers: Alan Smith (Head of Detector Physics group
      1990-2005; Head of Department 2005-present; Professor of Detector Physics
      1998-present) and Dave Walton (Research Fellow 1990-present; Head of
      Photon Detection Systems group 2006-present).
    