CaseStudyId: 34489
Title: 
    The birth of the newspaper: understanding new media
    

ImpactDetails

    Peacey's research has had an impact on public understanding of the role
      of mass media in politics and society insofar as it has provoked
      discussion and reflection among large non-academic audiences in both US
      and UK. In the US, Peacey communicated the results of his research to the
      general public primarily through a major exhibition at the Folger
      Shakespeare Library in Washington, DC, the world's most important
      non-university centre for the study of the Age of Shakespeare. The impact
      of the exhibition was further enhanced by Peacey's appearance on National
      Public Radio (NPR), by blogs posted by visitors and above all by feature
      articles in the quality press: The Nation, The New York Times
      and Washington Post. In the UK, Peacey has engaged with the
      general public via media appearances, on-line articles and public
      lectures, notably including senior staff of the Secret Intelligence
      Service (MI6).
    The Folger exhibition, Breaking News: Renaissance Journalism and the
        Birth of the Newspaper (25/9/2008-31/1/2009), co-curated with Chris
      R. Kyle (a historian of the early modern British parliament at Syracuse
      University), explored issues which have been central to Peacey's research
      (esp. [b-d] and [f]), including government censorship and manipulation of
      the news, the ways in which readers responded to journalists and their
      innovations, and the opportunities which newspapers offered to citizens in
      terms of facilitating political engagement and participation. This
      exhibition resulted from a formal proposal to the Library by the two
      curators, following informal encouragement from library staff, as well as
      successful bids for funding from an educational trust, the Gladys Kriebel
      Delmas Foundation, which contributed $20,000. Its preparation involved the
      two curators sharing the responsibilities involved in undertaking research
      within the Folger collections, collaborating with a range of curatorial
      and conservation staff, and liaising with those involved in designing and
      publicising the exhibition and its catalogue. In addition to drawing on
      the Folger's own resources, the exhibition brought together materials from
      collections in New York, Boston and London, and involved the construction
      of a working full-scale replica of a seventeenth-century printing press,
      which the Folger Library continues to use for educational purposes.
    The (free) exhibition attracted c. 5,000 visitors, and was accompanied by
      a website and an audio tour, both of which are still available [1]. Also
      still available is the substantial exhibition catalogue, of which 384
      copies have been sold to date [2]. Peacey outlined the key elements of the
      exhibition on National Public Radio [3], and the feature articles in the
      US press discussing the exhibition had a potential combined readership of
      hundreds of thousands: the daily print circulation of New York Times
      [4] is 779,731; the Washington Post [5] 2.12 million; and The
        Nation [6] 174,000. Adding coverage in minor printed media, such as
      the Washington Examiner, and the readership of blogs devoted to
      the exhibition [7], we may conclude that Peacey's key research findings
      reached up to 3 million people in the United States.
    In the UK, Peacey presented elements of his research in three radio
      programmes with a combined audience of 1.19 million people. He was a
      contributor to Killing the King (Radio 3; 1 February 2009;
      audience 51,000), which discussed evidence about and interpretations of
      the trial of Charles I in 1649, not least the ways in which this key
      episode was politically managed as a media event. He acted as historical
      consultant and contributor to The Long View (Radio 4; 3 March
      2009), where he offered the audience of 307,000 a historical perspective
      on political transparency and accountability &#8212; not least in relation to
      investigative journalism &#8212; during the recent scandal relating to MPs
      expenses. His largest UK audience were the 832,000 listeners of Random
        Edition (Radio 4; 7 May 2010) to whom he explained the role of a
      vibrant journalistic culture in the events leading up to the Restoration
      of the Stuart dynasty in 1660. More recently, he has communicated his
      research findings on the relationship between the print revolution and
      ideas about political representation through digital media, with an
      article on the official website of the Westminster Parliament to mark
      Parliament Week 2012 [8], and a contribution to a public history project
      based at Sheffield University's Centre for the Study of Democratic Culture
      [9], started up in early 2010.
    Throughout, Peacey has also addressed wider audiences in person, giving
      public lectures to a range of societies and institutions: the Maidstone
      Museum (2008), Buckinghamshire Historical Association, Bath Royal Literary
      and Scientific Institute (2009), the Cromwell Association (2010), the
      Winchester Historical Association (2012), and, as noted, the Secret
      Intelligence Service (2009), where he spoke on intelligence gathering
      under Cromwell. These lectures had a combined audience of c. 400,
      including the Director General of MI6.
    This impressive reach is complemented by clear evidence of significance:
      Peacey's audiences demonstrably learned from, and actively engaged with,
      the research findings that he presented to them. This is best illustrated
      by the response to the Folger Library exhibition. A nice indication of the
      difference made by research is the contrast drawn by both a newspaper
      reviewer and a blogging visitor between the Folger exhibition and an
      ostensibly similar exhibition on the history of newspapers in the nearby `Newseum'.
      Barbara Krasnoff's Live Journal blog sums up the latter as
      provoking merely `a shrug', whereas Peacey's exhibition is by contrast
      `fantastic' [7]. What underlies her response is further articulated by E.
      Rothstein in The New York Times [4], who argues that the Newseum
      presents merely a glorification of the modern press, whereas the Folger
      exhibition showed how `the genetic code of modern journalistic culture was
      laid down four centuries ago in England' and provoked serious reflection
      on the challenges now faced by print journalism. Indeed, Rothstein felt
      that the exhibition illuminated the much larger story of the emergence of
      `an expanded sense of the importance of individual opinion' and ultimately
      `the birth of the modern West' itself. In The Nation, Richard
      Byrne reported that the exhibition offered `useful' and `valuable' lessons
      for those who are concerned about the fate of the news media in the modern
      world, both because it showed how early journalism managed to overcome
      obstacles to its development, and because it explained the `complex
      interplay between government and the press' [6]. Philip Kennicott in The
        Washington Post, stressing the exhibition's `timely relevance' was
      struck by other modern resonances. As well as pointing out the `stark and
      powerful' lessons to be drawn from the evidence for the use and ultimate
      failure of `brutal' censorship, he noted that `Folger exhibitions let you
      make your own connections' and proceeded to identify striking similarities
      between `journalism when it was young' and `our own anarchic and newly
      democratised age of the World Wide Web' [5]. The impact of Peacey's
      research here lies in its ability to stimulate reflection on the nature
      and potential of modern electronic media.
    Not all feedback on Peacey's exhibition or other public engagement work
      is quite so articulate, of course, but it does uniformly testify to its
      `engrossing' nature, as the Washington Examiner put it [10], and
      thus to its significant contribution to the intellectual life of a very
      large audience, who have been not only educated in the history of the
      printed media but also prompted to reflect on parallels with the position
      of mass media in the modern world and on implications for the currently
      controversial use of social media.
    
ImpactSummary

    The role of mass media in politics and society has in recent years been a
      subject of intense public debate, as well as lengthy legal investigation
      and repeated political intervention. Dr Jason Peacey's research on the
      earliest modern printed mass media and their relation to government and
      state at the time of the English Civil War illuminates the origins of the
      current situation, and has made a notable impact on public understanding,
      of the historical roots of the media's role in mediating between states
      and citizens in both the US and UK. This occurred through a major museum
      exhibition at the Folger Shakespeare Library in Washington, DC, as well as
      a range of public engagement and media activities in Britain.
    
UnderpinningResearch

    Across a range of scholarly articles (including [a] and [b]) Dr Jason
      Peacey (Lecturer at UCL since 2006; Senior Lecturer since 2009) has
      explored the history of print culture and developed new ways of
      interpreting the development of political pamphleteering, the rise of a
      news industry, and the commercialisation and professionalisation of
      journalism in the seventeenth century. This has involved close scrutiny of
      the authors, printers and patrons of mass-produced pamphlets and
      newspapers, and of the ways in which politicians controlled and exploited
      these new media for their own purposes, and has enabled him to show that
      mechanisms of propaganda and censorship became an integral part of
      politics and government. This innovative methodology has made it possible
      to demonstrate not just that attempts to exert control over the media had
      the effect of politicising the public sphere but also that this sometimes
      undermined traditional attitudes towards political secrecy, paradoxically
      helping to enhance political accountability. As such, Peacey has been able
      to illuminate the origins and nature of the precarious relation between
      the power of the state and the power of the media that continues to be a
      source of much contention in the modern world.
    Central to this research has been an enhanced understanding of England's
      fledgling newspaper industry (including [c]), which rapidly became a focal
      point for political attention and for novel political techniques and
      strategies relating to `news management'. This has revealed the complex
      competing forces which influenced the new medium, from commercial
      imperatives to factional tensions, and showed that these ultimately led to
      the integration of newspapers into a governmental system which combined
      spies and agents, a civil service secretariat and salaried journalists.
      But it also provided some of the clearest evidence that official responses
      to the print revolution (rather than just investigative journalism) also
      had the effect of enhancing political transparency.
    Peacey's research has gone on to analyse the impact of and response to
      the new print media beyond the level of the metropolitan political elite,
      which had been central to his earlier work. In a number of recent studies,
      culminating in his book Print and Public Politics in the English
        Revolution [f], he has investigated the audience for and reception
      of print, popular awareness of national politics, and the extent of
      participation in national political life. Peacey has assessed how various
      new print media were consumed and perceived across distinct social groups
      and different geographical areas; how contemporaries responded to ideas
      and information about political processes and proceedings which these
      media made available; and finally how print fostered and intensified
      political participation, not least through lobbying, protesting,
      electioneering and holding representatives to account. Again, a range of
      articles (incl. [d] and [e]) presented detailed case studies illuminating
      the social and geographical reach of print, the process of acculturation
      to genres as diverse as the handbill and the newspaper, the importance of
      non-commercial print culture, and the use of print to foster communication
      between MPs and their constituents. The recent monograph [f] presents the
      resulting synthesis: a major reassessment of the communications revolution
      of the seventeenth century, which shows that amid structural change and
      conjunctural upheaval a dramatic re-shaping of the political nation
      occurred, as citizens from all walks of life developed new habits and
      practices for engaging in daily political life, and for protecting and
      advancing their interests. This process ultimately involved experience-led
      attempts to rethink the nature of representation and accountability and
      inspired the formulation of ideas which resonate to this day.
    