CaseStudyId: 34488
Title: 
    Practising religious toleration
    

ImpactDetails

    Kaplan's book, Divided by Faith, has had a major impact on the
      vigorous and vital current debate in public discourse and in academic
      education about the possibilities for toleration in the contemporary
      world, including in highly religious societies across the globe. The book
      was not only widely read beyond academia but gave rise to extensive and
      lively debate in US, UK and Dutch media, and was adopted as a key text by
      two human rights organisations as well as on a range of undergraduate and
      postgraduate university courses in Britain and abroad. Kaplan further
      contributed to the development of public discourse on toleration by means
      of a TV appearance and a number of lectures to non-academic organisations.
    The extensive reach of Divided by Faith is demonstrated
      first of all by sales figures. The book sold many more copies than
      academic books typically do: total sales until mid-2013 are just under
      6,000 copies [1], and in the months following its publication, the book
      was for a time ranked #1 for sales on Amazon.com in the category of
      Western European History, while in the UK it was ranked #1 on Amazon.co.uk
      in the category of Religious Studies. These figures are in themselves
      proof of considerable extra-academic interest in the book and its themes.
      Still wider public awareness of Kaplan's research findings was ensured by
      extensive media coverage, with a feature article in the New York Times
      (print circulation c. 780,000) by the paper's religion correspondent, who
      wrote: `at this moment, there may be no more important story than the one
      Europeans and Americans proudly tell themselves about the rise of
      religious toleration. So please take note of Benjamin J. Kaplan's argument
      that the story may be dangerously flawed' [2]. Divided by Faith
      was also the subject of an extended discussion in American political
      periodical The Nation [3], the oldest continuously-published
      weekly magazine in the United States (print circulation c. 174,000), and
      of newspaper reviews that noted the book's contemporary relevance - in the
      Economist, the Times Higher Education Supplement, the Dutch
      national daily NRC Handelsblad (which noted the book's
      contribution to the contemporary `debate on integration' in Dutch
      political circles), the Church of England Newspaper, and the
      ecumenical Christian Century Magazine [4]. A total of up to 1
      million people were thus made aware of Kaplan's research through print
      media. We may add the many users who continue to access on-line versions
      of several of the above publications, including the substantial articles
      [2] and [3], and the TV audience that saw Kaplan discuss his findings on
      religious toleration in an episode of the series Christianity: A
        History, broadcast in February 2009 on Channel 4 (UK) and
      subsequently viewed more than 46,000 times on YouTube [5]. A combined
      audience of c. 80 people benefited from Kaplan's insights through
      smaller-scale but more intensive public engagement activity: his lectures
      on toleration in public forums incl. the USC Shoah Foundation, Los
      Angeles; the Hampstead Museum, London; and Austin Friars, the Dutch Church
      in London.
    The significance of the impact made by Divided by Faith
      was noted immediately by the first reviews of the book, but these appeared
      in the last few weeks of 2007 and will therefore not be cited as evidence
      of significant impact in the current assessment period. From early 2008
      onwards, however, Divided by Faith fed directly into the debate
      sparked by proponents of `the new atheism' when it was featured in a
      highly polemical article by Daniel Lazare in The Nation, which
      denied the possibility that people of genuine religious faith could be
      tolerant. Kaplan weighed in on the debate with a rebuttal of Lazare's
      article that was published in a subsequent issue of the same periodical on
      a Letters page, which also included responses from other readers [2].
      Similarly, a blog reviewing the book for the Dutch national newspaper De
        Volkskrant provoked 48 readers' comments in the first day alone,
      most of the responses discussing contemporary relations between Christians
      and Muslims, in particular mixed marriages; the principle of freedom of
      speech; and the difference between freedom (vrijheid) and
      liberalism (vrijzinnigheid) [6]. Kaplan's findings and arguments
      have become a regular point of reference in non-academic books that
      address contemporary problems of religious diversity, such as those by
      high-profile public intellectuals Ian Buruma and Richard Sennett [7], but
      also in specialised studies which apply Kaplan's research in order to find
      practical solutions to problems such as the ecumenical use of multi-faith
      spaces [8]. At the other end of the spectrum, Divided by Faith is
      cited in the world's most popular reference tool, in Wikipedia
      entries on Toleration, Religious Persecution, and Early Modern Europe.
    Kaplan's book has established itself as required reading in academic
      education at both undergraduate and postgraduate levels in Britain and
      abroad, not only in humanities programmes but also in programmes of law
      (e.g. SUNY Buffalo Law School in 2011) and theology (e.g. Lancaster
      Seminary), which are more practice-orientated. Recently, it was the key
      text for a module on toleration in early modern Europe on a Political
      Science/Study of Religion advanced seminar course `Secularism and
      Religion' (Spring term 2013) at the University of Toronto, as well as the
      main textbook for the second half of an introductory undergraduate history
      course `Early Modern Europe 1500-1789' (Summer term 2013) at Simon Fraser
      University, Canada [9].
    The ideas and evidence presented in Divided by Faith have been
      used by human rights organisations to enhance their own understanding of
      religious toleration and to formulate a discourse designed to combat
      intolerance. Kaplan has in person acted as consultant in these processes:
      in 2008 and again in 2010 the Executive Director of the international
      human rights organisation Humanity in Action (HIA) solicited his expert
      advice. The Director reports that Kaplan's research `helped me to
      reconceptualize toleration &#8212; to understand it as a social practice rather
      than an abstract ideal, ... to see the wide variety of forms it could take
      ... [and to] identify the flashpoints for religious conflict ... currently
      operative in India, Indonesia, and other places around the globe' [10].
      Kaplan spoke about the practical lessons to be drawn from his research in
      November 2008 to a gathering of HIA's UK fellows, and Divided by Faith
      was adopted by HIA in 2008 as required reading for its fellowship
      programmes &#8212; about 60 fellows subsequently read portions of the book [10].
      The book is also cited on the website of Tolerance International UK, an
      NGO which `aims to promote community cohesion, tolerance and moderation
      between peoples' [11].
    In sum, the significance of the impact lies in the success of Kaplan's
      research in making people aware of clear historical evidence that
      pragmatic religious toleration is entirely possible even in a world that
      seems doomed to be torn apart by violently opposed religious
      fundamentalists. The research has also demonstrated by historical examples
      that toleration can take forms other than the ones dominant in
      contemporary western countries. The obvious implications for current
      political debates on religion, atheism and multiculturalism were
      recognised by the nomination of Divided by Faith for the
      Louisville Grawemeyer Award (2008), established `to highlight ideas and
      works that "make the world a better place"`.
    
ImpactSummary

    Professor Benjamin Kaplan is a pioneer of what has been called `the new
      history of toleration', which is of great significance to the public's
      understanding of the possibilities for peaceful coexistence between people
      of different faiths in the post-9/11 world. More than any other work in
      this revisionist school of historical writing, Kaplan's book Divided
        by Faith has been read and discussed by journalists, human rights
      organisations, churches and other non-academic audiences in North America,
      Britain and The Netherlands; it has also widely been used in university
      teaching. Kaplan's research has thus profoundly influenced public
      discourse and academic education regarding the history and character of
      religious toleration.
    
UnderpinningResearch

    Kaplan has been Professor of Dutch History at UCL since October 2001. His
      research on toleration, supported in 2001-2002 by the US National
      Endowment for the Humanities and in 2002-2003 by the American Council of
      Learned Societies, produced a string of publications between 2002 and
      2009, including most importantly his 2007 book Divided by Faith
      [a]. This book was the first general history of religious toleration in
      early modern Europe published in English in four decades. So far it has
      had no successor. Covering the entire continent over three centuries, it
      treats toleration not in the conventional manner, as an abstract ideal
      enunciated by writers, but as a social practice enacted in local
      communities. Historical but politically engaged, it demonstrates the
      possibility of peaceful coexistence in societies that do not embrace
      western notions of human rights - societies where religion powerfully
      shapes the identities of individuals and communities. It shows that
      religious toleration can take a variety of forms that are qualitatively
      different from one another, many of them quite unlike the forms prevailing
      in western countries today. And it challenges the self-congratulatory
      narrative which people in western countries - scholars and the general
      public alike - commonly tell themselves about a gradual, evolutionary
      `rise of toleration' taking place over centuries, uniquely in their lands.
    Other publications by Kaplan expound the same revisionist arguments in
      relation to specific subtopics, including relations between Protestants
      and Catholics [b], Christians and Muslims [c], and spouses of different
      faiths [d]; and spatial [e] and diplomatic [f] arrangements for worship by
      religious dissenters. These publications explore in depth some of the ways
      and places that a toleration functioned in early modern Europe that are
      most telling from a contemporary perspective: in states that maintained a
      single, official faith; in repressive capital cities such as Vienna and
      Lisbon; in the intimate setting of nuclear families; and between those
      religious groups who were most opposed to one another ideologically. They
      demonstrate the effective functioning of a pragmatic toleration in all
      these settings even before the modern concept of religious freedom was
      developed. They thus offer thought-provoking historical points of
      comparison to contemporary settings where the attainment of toleration
      seems most difficult.
    