CaseStudyId: 34490
Title: 
    Development of models permitting the use of Earth Observation data to
        monitor global climate change and land management
    

ImpactDetails

    The research described in section 2 made a vital contribution to the
      development of the MODIS Bidirectional Reflectance Distribution Function
      and Albedo Product MOD43B, and to the subsequent development of the MODIS
      Burned Area product. The availability of routine, automated,
      near-real-time data is a vital part of global monitoring by the Global
      Climate Observing System, the Committee on Earth Observation Satellites
      and the UNFCCC. This research has led to the development of the de facto
      standard albedo and fire Essential Climate Variables (ECVs) distributed by
      NASA and the European Space Agency (ESA), and used to model climate change
      and provide data for planning and climate change agreements. Albedo is a
      primary ECV, and the MODIS product has been used globally for environment,
      security, management and climate-related applications since 2001. The
      Burned Area product, conceived by UCL researchers as an outgrowth of the
      albedo product, enables officials in the United States, Australia and
      South Africa (among other places) to accurately monitor fire impacts and
      develop fire management plans.
    Albedo: The Earth's surface temperature is partly controlled by
      its albedo: lower albedo means more radiation is absorbed rather than
      reflected, and thus the higher the temperature (and vice versa). The
      albedo depends on the nature of the surface; thus forests, cultivated
      fields and bare soil will all have different albedos and affect the
      weather, and more broadly, the climate, differently. For this reason, in
      2007, the International Panel on Climate Change Fourth Assessment Report
      (IPCC AR4) [1] identified globally consistent albedo measurement as
      essential for monitoring climate change. In 2009 the UN Food and
      Agriculture Organisation (FAO) identified MODIS albedo as a key component
      of the Global Terrestrial Observing System (GTOS) [2], a programme to
      support sustainable development by establishing global observation and
      modelling networks to provide the evidence required to detect and manage
      environmental change. GTOS, as directed by the UN Framework Convention on
      Climate Change (UNFCCC), defines protocols and standards for monitoring
      and measurement to facilitate agreement on managing environmental change.
      Thus research has contributed directly to the capacity for global climate
      change monitoring broadly, and to the attainment of GTOS' objectives more
      specifically. A specific example of this use is by CICERO, an agency which
      advises the Norwegian government on climate change. This uses Globalbedo,
      the refinement to MODIS albedo described in section 2, to analyse the
      effects of anthropogenic vegetation change. [5]
    MODIS albedo has been widely adopted to improve numerical weather
      prediction (NWP), which is vital to policy and commercial decisions
      relating to weather events. MODIS albedo is used to parameterise and test
      leading global NWP schemes, e.g. the European Centre for Medium-Range
      Weather Forecasting (ECMWF) model [3]. In 2007, the ECMWF incorporated the
      MODIS albedo product into its operational Integrated Forecasting System,
      which improved its forecasting capability demonstrably [4]. ECMWF
      forecasts using MODIS albedo, developed through UCL research, are provided
      to a range of agencies, such as the UK's Met Office, who use the products
      to develop short- to medium-range forecasts, e.g. to give early warning of
      potentially severe weather [6]. In November 2008 the UK Met Office
      integrated MODIS albedo into its NWP suite as part of a `significant
      upgrade', thus improving forecasting of near-surface temperature, cloud
      and visibility [7]. In 2013, the Met Office began upgrading to use
      Globalbedo to eliminate the MODIS bias towards higher temperatures in
      summer, saying "Tests show that they (Globalbedo data) help to give more
      accurate temperature forecasts over the United States and Asia, especially
      in summer" [5].
    Burned area (BA): The MODIS Burned Area product developed by UCL
      researchers and distributed by NASA is also a key component of GTOS [8].
      In 2010, the Burned Area product was incorporated as a core part of the UN
      FAO Global Fire Information Management System (GFIMS) [9], an
      international monitoring system which delivers data to monitoring and
      emergency response projects conducted by national mapping agencies and
      other stakeholders. The product is widely used by park and natural
      resource managers to monitor fire, particularly in remote areas where
      fires may go unwitnessed and regrowth swiftly covers the extent of fire
      damage. These data are then used to plan management and rehabilitation,
      and for preserving and enhancing biodiversity.
    The US National Interagency Fire Center (http://www.nifc.gov)
      relies on the MODIS BA product via the FAO's GFIMS [9] to develop
      aggregate records of fire extents, complementing data on active fires. It
      provides these data to its constituent agencies (e.g. the National Park
      Service, US Forest Service) to use in developing land and fire management
      plans. The USDA Forest Service, for instance, provides burn scar maps
      using a modified version of the MODIS Burned Area algorithm [9] Similar
      organisations in Australia (Landgate FireWatch) and Brazil (INPE) also
      generate burned area maps for use by emergency services, using MODIS data
      from GFIMS [9].
    The BA product has also had direct impacts on conservation and
      biodiversity management in sub-Saharan Africa. At the Kruger National
      Park, a 1.9 million hectare game reserve in South Africa, the National
      Parks Service (SANPARKS) has used MODIS data since 2006 to map burned
      areas, monitor fires and analyse fire intensity and heterogeneity. Where
      unreported fires are detected, rangers are sent to assess the fire impacts
      on the ground and feed these data back into the park fire information
      system. The park's fire ecology manager describes how the mapping system,
      which remained in use through the impact period, improved mapping accuracy
      and captured the patchiness in burned areas, thus preventing
      over-estimation of burned areas and mapping their heterogeneity. By
      assessing the impact of fire over time on the park's flora and fauna,
      SANPARKS can make informed decisions about fire management to maintain the
      park's fragile ecosystem [10].
    
ImpactSummary

    Albedo and fire impacts have been identified as Essential Climate
      Variables, i.e. key to climate monitoring systems and for informing
      land-use management. UCL research underpinned development of global,
      long-term satellite albedo and burned area products, which have become de
      facto standards distributed freely by NASA and the European Space Agency
      (ESA). The albedo data are used by meteorological agencies such as the UK
      Met Office, and for climate monitoring by organisations such as the UN
      Food and Agriculture Organisation (FAO). The burned area data are used for
      fire management by government agencies including the US Department of
      Agriculture and South African National Parks Agency.
    
UnderpinningResearch

    Albedo defines the reflectivity of the Earth's surface and determines how
      solar energy is partitioned between the surface and atmosphere. It varies
      as a result of natural processes (e.g. snowfall, vegetation growth) and
      human activities (e.g. forestry, agriculture) and is a sensitive indicator
      of environmental vulnerability. Thus consistent long-term satellite
      observations of the land surface are key requirements for global climate
      monitoring and for addressing the needs of the United Nations Framework
      Convention on Climate Change (UNFCCC), which came into effect in 1994. If
      satellite products are based on fundamental physical principles, rather
      than locally calibrated empirical relationships, their utility is
      increased hugely: they are comparable with field measurements, are
      consistent across space and time and with models of weather and climate.
    Turning satellite observations of reflected sunlight into albedo requires
      models of how surface reflectance changes over time. Since 1996, a number
      of breakthroughs by the Environmental Monitoring and Modelling (EMM)
      Research Group at UCL has made this modelling approach feasible for global
      coverage in real-time. This has resulted in physically based albedo (http://modis-land.gsfc.nasa.gov/brdf.html)
      and fire impact (http://modis-land.gsfc.nasa.gov/brdf.html) products from
      satellite observations. Previously, such applications had been limited in
      both space and time, making them unsuitable for global climate and
      monitoring applications. EMM work was critical in proving that physically
      realistic models could be used to produce albedo rapidly and accurately on
      global scales and, crucially, to provide uncertainty in resulting outputs
      [a].
    This research by UCL's Professor Philip Lewis between 1999 and 2005, in
      collaboration with NASA colleagues, led to the development of an algorithm
      to use data collected by the Moderate Resolution Imaging Spectroradiometer
      (MODIS) instruments on two NASA satellites to provide a global 1km albedo
      product [b]. Prof Lewis and UCL lecturer Dr Mathias Disney then worked
      with the NASA MODIS team at Boston University to develop the
      implementation and testing of this algorithm [c] in 1998-2004. Lewis's key
      contribution was to demonstrate that albedo models could be made linear,
      drastically increasing efficiency and providing uncertainty estimates as a
      by-product (critical in the adoption of the product in climate
      forecasting). Disney and Lewis then led European testing of the MODIS
      albedo product in 1997-2005. In 2009-2012 Lewis led development of
      Globalbedo for the European Space Agency (ESA), which builds on the MODIS
      albedo product, updating it with observations from other ESA satellites (http://www.globalbedo.org/index.php).
    Fire has significant impacts on forestry, agriculture and health (witness
      recent large fires in the US) and is a major source of natural and
      anthropogenic change to the land surface. Approximately 464 million ha of
      land are burned each year, releasing 2.5 Pg of carbon into the atmosphere.
      Fires are hard to monitor due to their dynamic, unpredictable nature. The
      methods developed by EMM for estimating albedo turned out to have more
      general application in modelling surface change including that caused by
      fire [d], and led to the development of the MODIS Burned Area product by
      UCL researchers (2000 to present), provided by NASA through the MODIS FIRE
      centre at the University of Maryland (http://modis-fire.umd.edu/Burned_Area_Products.html).
      Algorithm development was led by Lewis and developed in [e]. Current work
      is funded by NERC and ESA to develop new fire monitoring and impact
      applications.
    Lewis joined UCL Geography as a lecturer in 1992 and made key
      developments in the modelling approach during 1997-2005. Disney joined the
      department as a lecturer in 2006 and extended the development and testing
      of the approach during 2002-2007. Further developments for improved fire
      mapping (Lewis, Disney), and optimal albedo estimation (Lewis) are
      ongoing.
    