CaseStudyId: 34491
Title: 
    The Open Air Laboratories (OPAL) project and its contribution to
        raising public awareness of, and participation in, freshwater science
    

ImpactDetails

    The OPAL Water Centre applied key aspects of the research methodologies
      and insights outlined above to deliver benefits to non-academic audiences
      including disadvantaged and traditionally hard-to-reach demographics [see
      5 in Section 5, pp. 25-26]. These pertained particularly to public
      engagement with water science through the OPAL Water Survey, but also,
      through the parallel research activities at the OPAL Water Centre, to the
      provision of important water quality data used by policy-making bodies to
      protect and enhance local and national environments. The Survey, which was
      launched on 12 May 2010, allowed people of all ages and abilities, but
      especially disadvantaged communities, to learn about aquatic environments
      and issues relating to water quality through hands-on science, generating
      a `snapshot' assessment of the nation's lake and pond water quality and
      the first national survey of lake sediment trace metals.
    Promoting pupil and public education through water quality surveys:
      Since its inception, the OPAL Water Centre has distributed 40,000 free
      water packs, 20,000 of which were sent as class packs to schools. The
      Centre has particularly encouraged young people to participate in water
      science and develop an interest in the natural world via 39 school visits,
      demonstrations and events delivered by UCL staff over the course of the
      project. These activities have led, in some cases, to the development of
      sustainable long-term initiatives supporting children's ongoing engagement
      with freshwater monitoring and conservation. For example, following a
      visit to them in 2012, Thames Ditton Junior School, Surrey successfully
      applied in the same year for a Royal Society Partnership Grant to support
      their pupils' continued monitoring of local ponds using OPAL Water Survey
      methods with support from UCL researchers [7]. The school science
      coordinator said the pupils "were truly enthralled and excited to be
      taking part in a real scientific investigation" [7]. Other youth
      organisations benefiting from participation in the project include the Cub
      Scouts who, in May 2012, adopted a version of the OPAL Water Survey as
      part of their newly revised `Naturalist' badge [8]. Water Survey pack
      contents remain available for free download from the OPAL Water website (http://www.opalexplorenature.org/TakePartWaterSurvey).
      17,200 packs had been downloaded by the end of the project in May 2013
      [4].
    The OPAL Water Survey, the largest lake and pond survey undertaken in the
      UK, led to widespread media coverage of water science, including
      publications aimed at young people. It was widely publicised in the
      national and youth press [3] and by the end of the project data returns
      exceeded 4,500 representing a &gt; 10% return [4], [5]; 94.7% of survey
      questionnaire respondents said they had learned something new from it [5,
      p.31] compared with 89.8% for OPAL overall. Participants also contributed
      photographs to a national pond-life photo gallery set up by the Guardian
      [3] and over 450 lake mud samples to the supplementary OPAL Metals Survey
      (May 2010-Dec 2011), to our knowledge the first public participation trace
      metal survey in the world [4]. Data from this were incorporated into the
      British Geological Society's G-BASE [4].
    Engaging deprived communities with water science: One of the OPAL
      Water Centre's primary objectives was to facilitate participation in water
      science among demographics that might not otherwise have the opportunity,
      by targeting survey distribution and public events within these
      communities. Of more than 45,000 OPAL Water beneficiaries (who actively
      took part in activities), 17% were classified as `hard-to-reach' and
      included deprived communities, people with special educational needs,
      victims of domestic abuse and black and minority ethnic groups [5, p.
      24-6]. 240 surveys were conducted in the country's 20% most deprived
      areas, and 483 in areas in the two highest crime domains. Participants
      included organisations such as the North Norfolk Workout Project, who work
      with the long-term unemployed, people with physical and mental health
      problems and adults with learning disabilities [6]; St. Mungo's, an
      organisation supporting homeless people, and providing drug and alcohol
      support and physical and mental health care; London Wildlife Trust's
      `Budding Together' project (helping people experiencing mental health
      problems get involved in conservation); and Southwark Youth Offending
      Services / New Leaf [5, p. 29], as well as Interact (Interfaith Action) an
      organisation working with young people of different faiths and
      non-religious beliefs to build understanding and respect through social
      interaction; and Blackpool's Marton Mere Junior Rangers (area in lowest 5%
      of Deprivation Indices).
    Alongside its educational benefits, one unexpected but gratifying outcome
      of the project's engagement with these groups has been the many
      participant testimonies to additional benefits in terms of increased
      personal wellbeing [5, p. 26]. As one worker from a charity supporting
      female victims of domestic abuse in the East Midlands explained: "I am
      dealing with people with mental health issues, such as depression, and
      spending a few hours out in the open air, doing things they did as kids,
      has really boosted their confidence" [5, p. 26].
    Provision of data supporting local and national governmental
        environmental interventions: Our research at a lake in each of nine
      regions of England (2008-12) (see 3 [e], above) undertaken alongside the
      main public participation surveys enabled local groups to develop
      conservation policies [1] and also provided key data for the UK
      contribution to a 2010 consultation on the Stockholm Convention on
      Persistent Organic Pollutants [2]. This arose from the OPAL Water team's
      detailed monitoring and research at the 9 lakes providing new data on
      pollutants listed as Priority Hazardous Substances under the European
      Union's Environmental Quality Standards Directive (2008/105/EC), such as
      mercury, PCBs (polychlorinated biphenyls) and brominated flame retardants
      (3 [e] above).
    The report to Defra [2] produced by AEA Technology (an independent
      scientific consultancy), used OPAL water and fish data to provide evidence
      for bioaccumulation of hexabromocyclododecane (HBCD) in UK freshwaters to
      demonstrate that "values are well above the bioaccumulation criterion...
      for listing under the Stockholm Convention". It noted that no other UK
      data were available and made specific reference to OPAL research outputs
      (3 [d], above), concluding these data provided "ample evidence of
      bio-accumulation...of HBCD in biota" [2]. HBCD has since been included in
      the Stockholm Convention for proposed elimination [2].
    At a local level, the OPAL Water Centre provided data to Hart District
      Council to help classify one of the 9 monitoring sites, Fleet Pond
      (Hampshire), as a failing water body under the EU Water Framework
      Directive (WFD) and thereby lever funds for a restoration strategy (first
      phase 2012- 15) [5, p. 72]. Hart District Council's Fleet Pond Management
      Plan 2010-2015 drew on OPAL Water Centre bathymetric, sediment and aquatic
      biota monitoring survey data [1, p. 77-79]. Dredging of Fleet Pond began
      in March 2012 on the basis of our data, and these will additionally be
      used to assess the success of current restoration activities.
    
ImpactSummary

    The OPAL Water Centre at UCL, funded to a total of &#163;732k, developed an
      innovative educational national water survey programme accessible to
      people of all ages and abilities, promoted especially within disadvantaged
      communities. Of the more than 45,000 participants, 17% were from 'hard to
      reach' communities. The Survey encouraged greater understanding of the
      aquatic environment through public participation in water quality and
      aquatic biodiversity assessment and used high-quality research to link the
      community, voluntary and statutory sectors by creating a channel through
      which locally derived information could lead to site-specific management
      as well as national and international policy.
    
UnderpinningResearch

    The Department of Geography at University College London (UCL) has a long
      history of research on pollutant (trace metals and persistent organic
      pollutants; POPs) distribution within aquatic ecosystems and their biotic
      effects (Rose, Turner, Yang) and also freshwater ecological assessment
      using aquatic biota (Goldsmith, Davidson). These two bodies of research
      underpinned the roles of UCL researchers as leads for the OPAL Water
      Centre (hosted at UCL), a component of the Open Air Laboratories (OPAL)
      network led by Imperial College.
    Between 1994 and 2003 we coordinated and managed a series of EU-funded
      projects on remote lakes (AL:PE2; MOLAR; EMERGE: Battarbee, Kernan,
      Patrick), which provided evidence for latitudinal and altitudinal changes
      in pollutant input across broad geographical scales; for the effects of
      trophic status of pollutant uptake in cold, oligotrophic waters; and for
      the presence of contaminants at considerable concentrations in new
      geographical regions (e.g. toxaphene in UK [a]). A 2006-09
      Leverhulme-funded project (Rose) used lake sediments to determine spatial
      and temporal patterns across the Tibetan Plateau [b], developing ideas of
      lake sediment inter- comparisons that were employed within the OPAL
      monitoring programme. More recently our research elucidated the role of
      climate change in remobilising pollutants from catchment soils and their
      transfer to aquatic systems in the context of upland lakes [c]. Regional
      studies undertaken since 1993 have linked the distribution of trace metals
      and sourced fly-ash particles for the first time, using lake sediments as
      spatially arrayed depositional archives (EU Copernicus UCL-led FLAME
      project 1994-96; Royal Society / Chinese Academy of Sciences projects,
      1992-94; 1998- 2001) (Rose). Distribution of pollutants (metals, POPs,
      fly-ash) and their impacts within aquatic systems was a theme continued at
      the national level by OPAL and led to the monitoring and assessment of
      contaminants in 9 lakes across England [d, e] by the OPAL Water Centre,
      and the national OPAL Metals Survey.
    In addition, the water quality assessment approach used by the OPAL Water
      Survey was based upon experience gained from UCL-led studies in
      determining ecological change within freshwaters using contemporary
      biological indicators (Goldsmith, Davidson). This approach, in which
      contemporary biota and their sub-fossil remains are used to assess the
      current and historical ecological quality of freshwaters, is now widely
      accepted as an established technique amongst statutory monitoring bodies.
      Our research using macrophytes, diatoms, chironomids and other
      macrofossils as ecological indicators [f] underpinned the decision to use
      aquatic invertebrates to assess water quality within the OPAL Water
      Survey, which employed a simple invertebrate classification scheme
      allowing participants to allocate a `pond health' score to any water body
      without prior training. The resulting data generated by individuals,
      schools, local interest groups and other organisations provided a
      `snapshot' of water quality across England that would otherwise have not
      been possible, including data for sites that would not have been
      accessible (e.g. private land) to traditional surveying approaches.
    