CaseStudyId: 34492
Title: 
    The use of names to establish geo-genealogy and cultural, linguistic
        and ethnic affinity
    

ImpactDetails

    Research conducted at UCL has improved the provision of targeted local
      health services through Camden and Southwark Primary Care Trusts. The
      underpinning names classification has subsequently been licensed to
      healthcare and government organisations, as well as to CACI Ltd. to
      improve the industry-leading ACORN commercial neighbourhood classification
      system used throughout business, government and public services. The
      public has been engaged with the research through innovative websites that
      allow searching and tracking of surnames across the UK and the world.
      Museums (such as London Science Museum) and heritage organisations (such
      as the National Trust) have presented these data to the public through
      interactive exhibits or their own websites.
    Licensing classification tools to public sector organisations:
      Names classification software was applied, in partnership with two London
      Primary Care Trusts (PCTs), to analyse the ethnic backgrounds of those
      seeking screening and care, and to target interventions accordingly. This
      occurred, as described in section 2, through Knowledge Transfer
      Partnerships (KTPs), with Camden PCT and Southwark PCT, two of the
      country's most ethnically diverse boroughs [c, d], where vagaries in the
      recording of ethnic background hampered effective targeting of health
      interventions. Building on the KTP, Southwark PCT hosted a 2011 pilot
      project seeking to increase extremely low rates of breast cancer screening
      amongst women of African Caribbean descent. As part of the this project,
      the names classification was used to identify the ethnic groups of women
      who missed screening, and then targeted resources and information
      accordingly, leading to an increase in the uptake of screening among
      African Caribbean women [1]. These partnerships, in turn, had an impact on
      how these and other PCTs understand GP referral patterns and admissions to
      A&amp;E. For instance, PCT staff worked with UCL researchers to use
      surname data and challenge a commonly held perception that A&amp;E usage
      differs by ethnicity [c in section 3 above].
    As awareness of the names classification tool has increased, over 15
      PCTs, strategic health authorities and other government organisations used
      it under licence between 2008 and 2013. For example, the Health Protection
      Agency, England (now Public Health England) used the software for ethnic
      classification in sentinel surveillance of hepatitis and other blood-borne
      viruses in 2011 and 2012 [2]. NHS Lothian, Scotland, licensed the software
      in August 2010 to code patient records by ethnic group and determine
      differential disease prevalence, as well as the level of uptake and
      accessibility to public health prevention services such as smoking
      cessation or cancer screening. NHS Lothian officials also used it to
      assess need and usage of interpretation in GP surgeries by Polish
      speakers, and to assist in developing a new interpretation service (ITS)
      contract [2].
    In the business sector, the classification was licenced to CACI Ltd for
      its ACORN classification &#8212; one of the most widely used general purpose
      geodemographic classifications in the UK today. ACORN is licensed to a
      very wide range of customer-facing organisations seeking effective
      communication with target groups. It has over 500 core licensees with
      long-term use of the complete dataset throughout their organisations,
      including government departments, local authorities, hospitals, banks,
      etc, and many others making more restricted use. Culture, ethnicity and
      linguistic group is profoundly important in shaping the neighbourhood
      geography of the UK as the country becomes more multi-ethnic and its
      ethnic minorities become more geographically dispersed. Recognising the
      increasing importance of effective classification of ethnicity, and
      cognisant of prospects for future UK population censuses, UCL research was
      used by CACI to provide a more differentiated source of ethnicity
      information than Census sources alone [3]. In March 2013, the latest ACORN
      classification was released, using this new approach, and was made
      available to CACI's huge customer base.
    Engaging a UK and international public with research: Through
      online maps that graphically present the research described in section 2,
      research has engaged a global public with an interest in family histories
      and historic migrations and, at the most basic level, the question: where
      do we come from? During the impact period, the website collectively was
      accessed by over 4 million unique visitors.
    The Public Profiler website (gbnames.publicprofiler.org) was originally
      developed, in 2006, out of the initial investigation into the geographic
      patterning of names in Great Britain. This was accessed by 1.6 million
      unique users in its first year alone, and between 1 September 2007 and 31
      July 2013 had over 1.3 million unique visitors, each of whom spent an
      average of nearly five minutes on the site and looked at 15 pages: this
      indicates a substantial degree of user engagement [4]. As a result of this
      widespread interest, and to mark the centenary of its founding
      legislation, the National Trust licensed a version of this website for
      three years (August 2007-2010) [5].
    When the initial analysis was extended to 25 other countries, an
      international surname mapping site (worldnames.publicprofiler.org) was
      created in 2007. Google Analytics show that this site was visited by more
      than 3.6 million unique users between 2008 and 31 July 2013, with each
      spending over 3 minutes viewing 6 pages [4]. Visitors originate
      predominantly from the USA and UK, with significant numbers from the
      European continent. James Cheshire was commissioned by National
        Geographic (US print circulation 5m) to draw upon the research to
      create a map of surname distribution in the United States, which appeared
      in February 2011. [7]
    A Twitter names map of London (twitternames.publicprofiler.org) was
      launched in December 2012 as part of the EPSRC Uncertainty of Identity
      project and building on names classification data. This was reproduced
      widely on high-circulation news websites, such as the Mail Online
      (24 April 2013; 170 comments, demonstrating engagement with research; 2.1m
      daily visitors) and Guardian (13 Dec 2012; nearly 1.4m daily
      visitors), collectively reaching up to 3.5m readers.
    Interactive educational exhibits for museums, increasing public
        understanding of science: Capitalising on the popularity and
      user-friendliness of the research and the website, science museums have
      utilised the research in interactive exhibits and to improve their own
      presentation of science topics such as identity and genetics. To date,
      over four million visitors to various museums are estimated to have been
      exposed to this interactive exhibit, and its significance may be gauged by
      the relationships cemented with various museums during the impact period.
    The At-Bristol science discovery centre used the research to develop an
      interactive exhibit for the Inside DNA exhibition (December 2007 to August
      2008), making the understanding of genetics both engaging and personally
      relevant by enabling visitors to trace migration patterns by the spread of
      their own surnames. Inside DNA subsequently became a 5-year travelling
      exhibition and appeared at museums including National Museums Liverpool
      (September 2010 to February 2011; 1.2m visitors in this period), MOSI
      Manchester (May 2011 to November 2011; 536,000 visitors in this period),
      and Thinktank Birmingham (May 2012 to November 2012) [8]. Another
      interactive exhibit was developed with London Science Museum
      (approximately 2.7m visitors per annum) where the exhibit was included in
      the 'Who Am I?' interactive exhibition (2010-15); visitors engage with
      complex issues of identity, genetics and inheritance through reference to
      the changing geography of visitors' own family genealogies. In the first
      year alone (2010-11), an evaluation found the redeveloped `Who Am I?'
      gallery had over a million visitors (twice the expected number) [9]. In
      2012, this research was selected for a display on Genetic Maps at the
      Royal Society's prestigious Summer Exhibition, showing how genetic makeup,
      names and facial characteristics are distributed across the UK (11,120
      visitors, 3-8 July).
    Most recently, the Glasgow Science Centre's &#163;1.9 million BodyWorks
      exhibition has the Family Names interactive exhibit, based on Public
      Profiler, as a key part of its exhibit, which "aims to allow visitors to
      learn about genetics, inheritance and cell biology". From its opening in
      April 2013 to August 2013, the exhibit received "overwhelmingly positive
      feedback" and attracted over 143,000 visitors and over 32,000 school
      children [10].
    
ImpactSummary

    UCL research has created a groundbreaking names classification tool for
      use by healthcare organisations, local government and industry. This
      improved the effectiveness of public service delivery to different
      cultural, linguistic and ethnic groups, in applications such as A&amp;E
      admissions and GP referral patterns. It was used by the leading provider
      of commercial geodemographic segmentation of neighbourhoods as a more
      differentiated source of ethnicity information than Census sources alone.
      The public was engaged with research through popular websites and
      extensive media coverage, and the research has provided interactive tools
      through which science museums have improved public understanding of
      genetics and family history.
    
UnderpinningResearch

    UCL Geography has longstanding interests in profiling the distinctive
      characteristics of neighbourhoods and the individuals who live in them, in
      order to understand better the structure and form of urban and regional
      systems. Since 2003, Paul Longley (Professor of GI Science, 2000 to
      present) and researchers (including Visiting Industrial Professor Richard
      Webber 2003-7) have investigated geographic concentrations of individual
      family names at scales from the local to the global. Important
      applications to migration were developed by Dr Pablo Mateos (ESRC Fellow
      from 2007, Lecturer 2008 to present).
    This included the development of a methodology to identify clusters of
      names in the British Isles [a]. Further research [b] showed how `naming
      networks', constructed from forename-surname pairs in 17 countries,
      provide a valuable representation of cultural, ethnic and linguistic
      population structure around the world.
    Since 2007, the scope of the work has been broadened (part-funded by an
      ESRC Impact Award) to include data from many countries, and a names
      classification software was developed that is nearing the point at which
      it offers truly global coverage. A key product is Onomap, which allows
      users to classify lists of names into groups of common cultural, ethnic
      and linguistic origin using surnames and forenames (http://www.onomap.org).
      Although led by Longley and Mateos and funded via UCL Geography, ongoing
      work is conducted in association with Dr James Cheshire (UCL Centre for
      Advanced Spatial Analysis; CASA).
    This software development is the culmination of applied geographical
      analysis originally carried out through a Knowledge Transfer Partnership
      (KTP) between UCL and Camden Primary Care Trust. A `birth place geocoder'
      was developed to improve the quantity and quality of ethnicity
      assignations on Camden's medical records. A subsequent KTP with Southwark
      PCT developed this work into a formal names classification tool to target
      public health initiatives and healthcare delivery: the research was used
      to analyse GP referral patterns [d] and usage of accident and emergency
      facilities [c].
    Related work, including an ESRC Business Engagement Award with ESRI Inc.,
      developed novel approaches to web mapping of names and Census of
      Population data. Underpinning research also developed out of two
      ESRC-co-funded CASE studentships. The first was in partnership with ESRI
      (UK) Ltd. (ESRC, 2008-11) and developed a number of novel applications of
      the family names databases using ESRI software. The second was in
      partnership with Southwark PCT (ESRC, 2008-11) and included the
      development of strategic applications of names-based classification of
      ethnicity.
    Most recently, the names classification was used by Longley and Dr
      Muhammad Adnan (Research Associate 2011 to present) to establish the
      probable ethnicity and age characteristics of a large (80 million) sample
      of Twitter microblog users. The academic motivation for this work is to
      examine patterns of segregation of different groups at different times of
      the day and week.
    