CaseStudyId: 34544
Title: 
    Improving the legal and corporate understanding of informal practices
        in Russia
    

ImpactDetails

    The research described above has been used by businesses and provided a
      basis for legal rulings and expert testimony in British courts.
    Impacts on Legal Understanding and Judicial Rulings
      Professor Ledeneva's research has been widely used in legal proceedings,
      informing both commercial and extradition cases in London. She has used
      insights garnered from her experience of research to transfer specialist
      knowledge and provide scholarly advice to legal experts and policy makers
      dealing with Russia or Russian matters. Notable examples since 2008
      include: [1]
    - Discussion for about 50 lawyers and businessmen at the Forum of the
      Russo-British Chamber of Commerce, London, on the legal environment for
      investment in Russia, 23-34 June 2010.
    - Talk at Pushkin House for over 100 attendees on the ramifications of
      high-profile Russian legal battles in London courts, sponsored by
      Littleton Chambers (on `Russian Legal Battles in London' on 6 June 2013.
    Through these talks and similar activities, Ledeneva's research has made
      a valuable contribution to major commercial and extradition cases at the
      High Court. An example of this is provided by one major extradition lawyer
      who has represented Russian individuals living in England but charged with
      criminal offences in Russia, leading to extradition requests. In nearly
      all of the cases for about 10 individuals he has been involved in, he was
      required to provide expert advice on issues surrounding the judicial
      system and related factors [2]. For these he considered Ledeneva's
      research `absolutely essential' [2], and specifically cited [a], [b] and
      [c] in section 3 above.
    Specific examples of the contribution of Ledeneva's research to recent
      legal cases include its use by an expert witness to argue, during a case
      brought in February 2010 for the extradition of the oligarch Yevgeny
      Chichvarkin, founder of Russia's biggest mobile phone company, Evroset,
      who fled Russia when police alleged that he had kidnapped a truck driver
      whom he believed had stolen a $1m consignment of mobile phones. Ledeneva's
      research on telephone justice was used to argue (inter alia) that the
      accused could not receive a fair trial in Russia unless special measures
      were taken. The request for extradition was eventually dropped [3].
      Another example was that of the expert witness report on the Russian
      political and legal regime in the $5bn Berezovsky -v- Abramovich case
      before Justice Gloster in 2012 [4].
    The research has also been quoted directly by judges in rulings on high
      profile commercial cases, including the &#163;2 billion suit by Michael Cherney
      against his fellow oligarch, Oleg Deripaska, in which Cherney claimed that
      he was owed a share of Rusal, the world's largest aluminium producer.
      First brought in 2006, the case was notably predicated on a request that
      the claim be served in London, rather than Russia. In his widely cited
      ruling on Cherney -v- Deripaska (2008), High Court Judge Mr Justice
      Christopher Clarke directly cited Ledeneva's research [c, e] in support of
      his ruling that Cherney did indeed have the right to sue Deripaska in an
      English court due to `the risks inherent in a trial in Russia'. In making
      this judgment, he referred particularly to `persistent rumours of
      "telephone justice", where the state or a senior judge gives the judge
      instructions to decide the case as was the norm in the Soviet era' [5].
      This decision was unanimously upheld in the Court of Appeal in 2009 [6].
      In an analysis of this much-discussed decision, a lawyer at the commercial
      law firm Herbert Smith LLP pointed out that: `Clarke was further persuaded
      by expert evidence that in Russia, in cases where the government itself is
      a party and which concern a direct material strategic interest of the
      Russian state, the courts may depart from their generally fair and
      impartial performance in a commercial dispute between private persons'
      [7].
    Impacts on Corporate Training and Consultancy
      In 2012, Transparency International ranked Russia 133rd out of 174
      countries on its corruption perception index, and according to some
      estimates, corruption accounts for 20-30% of the cost of doing business in
      Russia. However, the real picture on the ground is extremely complex, and
      businesses employ a wide range of internal and external strategies to
      navigate and tackle corruption. As a result, Ledeneva's expertise on
      informal practices was frequently solicited by business intelligence
      consultancies and think tanks in the UK, US and Europe; during the impact
      period, she received several requests for talks which led to her work
      being utilised for business intelligence services to a wide range of
      corporate clients, but particularly large banking institutions, by Alaco
      and GPW [8].
    Ledeneva has also drawn on her research ([b] above) in work conducted
      between 2010 and 2013 with Professor Stanislav Shekshnia of INSEAD, one of
      the world's leading graduate business schools, with campuses in France,
      Singapore and Abu Dhabi. Here, her work was used to devise surveys on
      informal practices to help CEOs and other executives to reflect on the
      variety of informal practices in their own organisations, to monitor and
      assess the subsequent risk of corruption there, and to devise strategies
      to manage them in this unique context [f]. Informal practices identified
      in Ledeneva's work constitute 27 entries in the questionnaire, thus
      enabling executives to reflect on the variety of informal practices in
      their organisations. Ledeneva's expertise on informal practices and
      corruption therefore allowed the development of this innovative corporate
      tool for the identification, measurement and mitigation of corruption
      risks.
    These surveys were disseminated to 140 senior managers through three
      training sessions (2010-12) on managing corruption in the INSEAD
      executive education programme at Fontainebleau and Singapore. They were
      subsequently used for almost 1,000 managers in the Sberbank-5000 INSEAD
      executive development programme [10]. In 2009-12 she also conducted
      executive workshops for approximately 40 executives from DTEK (Ukraine),
      NIS (Serbia) and Gazpromneft (Russia) [10]. The academic programme
      director, and Ledeneva's collaborator, cited the positive rating her
      sessions received (3.9 out of 5), and noted that several attendees had
      utilised the materials independently; one launched an internal corruption
      mitigation programme, while another applied the methodology to their North
      African operations [10]. Russia's third-largest oil company, TNK-BP, for
      example, incorporated the surveys into training materials for executives
      in Singapore (September and October 2011) and for alumni conferences in
      Moscow (December 2011), whilst PricewaterhouseCoopers sponsored a lecture
      on Russian cases in London courts at the Great Britain Russia Society,
      London (2 December 2009) and a PwC in-house talk on 18 March 2010 [9].
      These tools thus provided a new approach to understanding and tackling
      corruption in the Russian context, and of developing ways to address it by
      drawing on tools developed on the basis of Ledeneva's research [10].
    
ImpactSummary

    Research conducted at UCL by Professor Alena Ledeneva on informal
      practices and governance networks in Russia led to the development of
      tools used by senior executives at international corporations working in
      Russia and elsewhere to evaluate and manage the risk of corruption in
      their organisations. The research also influenced the rulings and expert
      testimony provided in British courts affecting the outcomes of major
      commercial trials such as Cherney -v- Deripaska (2008) and Berezovsky -v-
      Abramovich (2011) as well as in extradition cases at the Westminster
      District Court in London.
    
UnderpinningResearch

    Professor Alena Ledeneva's research on corruption and informality has
      built her an international reputation in a field she has effectively
      defined. Professor Ledeneva began at UCL as a Lecturer in 1999, and was
      promoted to a Chair in 2008.
    Ledeneva's research at UCL builds on her earlier work on Russia's economy
      of favours which helped to solve a double puzzle in the history of
      authoritarian regimes: in Soviet times, reliance on informal networks
      allowed people to survive in an economy of shortage, just as it allowed
      the Soviet regime to endure despite the systemic inefficiency of its
      institutions. While formally supporting the regime, people engaged in
      multiple informal practices in order to mitigate its pressure. Blat
      &#8212; the use of personal networks for getting things done - provides just one
      example of the many informal practices that both made the regime more
      tolerable and, at the same time, helped to undermine it, thus serving both
      continuity and change. Her 2000 publication [a] developed Ledeneva's
      analysis of the ambivalent nature of informal practices that both
      subverted and supported institutions in both the Soviet and post-Soviet
      eras.
    Subsequent research has examined the informal practices that replaced blat
      during Russia's dramatic break-up with its communist past [b].
      `Democratic' and `market' institutions, including competitive elections,
      free media, independent judiciary and secure property rights, to be
      established during the 1990s, became enveloped in informal practices that
      both facilitated their development and undermined it. Kompromat, black
        piar, krugovaya poruka, barter and double accounting were the most
      widespread in that period [b]. Arguing that such practices constitute
      important indicators in assessing the outcomes of reform, Ledeneva turned
      to analysis of the network-based system of informal governance &#8212; Putin's sistema
      &#8212; characterised by informal incentives, control and capital flows operated
      by power networks [c]. What it lacks in democratic graces the sistema
      appears to compensate, according to Ledeneva, with the effectiveness of
      its networks and relationships and their impressive capacity to mobilise
      [c].
    Aiming to disaggregate predominant notions of corruption, Ledeneva argues
      that informal practices not only can be measured, but constitute
      indicators that can be instrumental in policy-making. Although informal
      practices do not readily lend themselves to quantitative analysis,
      Professor Ledeneva devised a survey measuring the public perception of
      informal pressure on the judiciary from the executive (so-called
      `telephone justice') [d]. A representative sample of 1,600 respondents was
      used in 2007, funded by the British Academy, followed by a repeated survey
      in 2010, commissioned by the EU-Russia Centre, which found that
      perceptions of extra-legal pressure on the judiciary remained widespread,
      despite multiple legal reforms undertaken by president Medvedev.
      Ledeneva's research identified the global implications of the weak rule of
      law in Russia, associated with `telephone justice' driving litigants away
      from Russian courts and towards British courts, resulting in Russia's loss
      of sovereignty as major decisions on Russian assets are decided in High
      Courts in London [c, d].
    In a 2009 paper, Ledeneva argued that the post-communist experience
      doesn't fit the global corruption paradigm [e]. To reveal the implications
      of post-communist corruption in the corporate sector, Ledeneva
      collaborated with Stanislav Shekshnia (Affiliate Professor of
      Entrepreneurship at INSEAD) to survey informal practices and mitigating
      strategies by 111 CEOs operating in Russia, the outcome of the pilot
      survey has been published in 2011 [f]. Devising alternative measurements
      of corruption has since become the core of the FP7 project
      "Anti-Corruption Policies Revisited: Global Trends and European Responses
      to the Challenge of Corruption" (2012-2017), a large-scale research
      project funded by the European Commission, where Ledeneva plays a leading
      role.
    