CaseStudyId: 40596
Title: 
    Bringing Jeremy Bentham to a 21st century public
    

ImpactDetails

    Transcribe Bentham has done what few if any other academic
      research projects have been able to do: it has engaged thousands of
      members of the public around the world in legal historical research. In
      doing so it has helped develop history, IT and analytical skills in the
      general public, and also demonstrated how crowdsourcing can be used much
      more widely as a tool for transcription in other settings and in other
      languages.
    Bringing Bentham to the masses
    By 2013, the Transcribe Bentham Transcription Desk had received
      over 1.9 million page views and had received 47,386 visits from 19,462
      unique visitors from 125 countries [11].
    
      The top 10 countries for visitors are: the US (79,959 visits); UK
        (55,567); Canada (11,658); Australia (5,824); Germany (5,152); New
        Zealand (3,469); France (2,910); Italy (2,610); Brazil (2,584); and the
        Netherlands (2,427) [11].
      The Project has used a combination of blogging and social media
        (Twitter and Facebook) to increase participation. By August 2012, Transcribe
          Bentham had acquired 853 followers on Twitter and 339 fans on
        Facebook [9, para.19].
    
    Transcribe Bentham has attracted over 4,000 registered users:
    
      400 of these users have gone on to transcribe material [10];
      6,416 manuscripts (estimated 3.2 million words) have been transcribed
        or partially-transcribed, and 95% of these are of sufficient quality to
        be uploaded to the Digital Repository [10];
      A third of transcribers are under 40, a fifth are over 60 [9, para.41]
        and two-thirds are female, unlike other crowdsourcing projects which
        attract a primarily male following [9, para. 39].
    
    The project has received extensive media coverage around the world:
    
      Despite mainly targeting English-speakers and the UK, the project has
        received media coverage in US, Australia, Japan, Germany, Norway,
        Sweden, Austria and Poland [8].
      A 2010 article in the New York Times [4] had a vital and
        enduring impact on Transcribe Bentham: with 11 visits to the
        project website the day before the article, and 1140 visits on the day
        of the article [9, para. 33]; this kick-started the formation of the
        large and engaged user community described above.
      When Transcribe Bentham project volunteers uncovered a
        collection of recipes intended for Bentham's panopticon prison, the
        Michelin-starred London restaurant, St John Smithfield, cooked one for
        Radio 4's PM Programme and it was incorporated into the
        restaurant menu [5].
    
    Public participation in legal history and development of IT skills
    The creation of a freely available digital collection of the Bentham
      Papers to complement the printed texts has widened access to and
      encouraged user participation with Bentham's writings. Transcribe
        Bentham recruited an active user community engaged in heavyweight
      transcription. This is remarkable because, unlike most crowdsourcing
      projects where material is straightforward to decipher, Bentham
      manuscripts are not easy to read. The result is that the project has also
      helped to develop IT and analytical skills among the public:
    
      Only a minority of transcribers had ever worked with manuscripts or
        had any specialised training in reading historical handwriting prior to
        taking part in Transcribe Bentham [9, para. 42].
      Bentham's handwriting is complex and time-consuming, requiring
        concentration and commitment. Many transcribers found the intellectual
        challenge and puzzle-solving aspect of transcription enjoyable and
        highly rewarding, with several comparing deciphering Bentham's
        handwriting to solving a crossword or Sudoku [9, para. 56].
    
    The truly unique and innovative impact of Transcribe Bentham has
      been recognised internationally, winning the 2011 Prix Ars Electronica
      Award of Distinction in this leading Digital Arts competition:
    
      The 2011 Prix Ars Electronica jury commended Transcribe
          Bentham for its "potential to become a standard tool for
          scholarly crowdsourcing projects", and its "potential to create
          the legacy of participatory education and the preservation of heritage
          or an endangered culture" [2, p. 206].
      
Transcribe Bentham was also shortlisted for the 2011 Digital
          Heritage Award [13].
    
    Influencing worldwide transcription and the wider information sector
    Transcribe Bentham demonstrates that there is a worldwide audience
      of potential volunteers who are willing and able to engage in demanding
      crowdsourced tasks. If untrained volunteers are able to transcribe the
      papers of Jeremy Bentham, some of which border on the illegible, this has
      shown that they can transcribe almost anything. The Bentham Project has
      made the code for the transcription tool freely available to download [d],
      and Transcribe Bentham and its outreach activities are being used
      as a model for other similar initiatives worldwide. For example:
    
      The Public Record Office of Victoria has launched a pilot project with
        the public to transcribe historical documents in its archive, using the
        Transcribe Bentham transcription tool [6].
      The Transcribe Bentham image viewer and transcription toolbar
        is now being used by the Irish Letters of 1916: Creating History
        project (based at Trinity College Dublin) [12].
      Bentham Project staff have been consulted on how the initiative can be
        used elsewhere by: the Natural History Museum, National Library of the
        Netherlands, Library and Archives Canada, Royal Library in Denmark, San
        Diego Natural History Museum, J. Paul Getty Research Institution and
        Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-Day Saints [10].
      The European Commission-funded TranScriptorium project is using
        the Transcribe Bentham transcription tool as a prototype tool
        for crowdsourcing material in other languages as part of its wider
        project to develop computers and programmes to read handwriting.
        Consortium partners include the Dutch Institute for Lexicology and Greek
        National Centre for Scientific Research, as well a number of academic
        institutions: the University of Valencia, University of Innsbruck,
        University of London Computer Centre and UCL's Bentham Project [9].
    
    Advancing the Bentham Project
    Given that the transcription task is much more onerous and demanding than
      in most other crowdsourcing projects, the amount of work completed by Transcribe
        Bentham volunteers is quite remarkable. Volunteers transcribed an
      average of thirty-five manuscripts each week [9, para. 45]:
    
      This has speeded up publication of The Collected Works. It is
        estimated that Transcribe Bentham could save between six months
        and one year of an academic editor's time [10].
      Without Transcribe Bentham, it will take at least 70 years to
        transcribe the remaining Bentham Papers. With Transcribe Bentham
        volunteers transcribing at the current rate, it will take about 35
        years. If more volunteers can be recruited, it could be done in 12-17
        years.
      These user-generated transcripts will be added progressively to the
        Digital Repository, and in this way the whole Collection is being
        further enhanced as time goes on.
      The project has resulted in significant publicity for Bentham studies,
        history and philosophy more generally. In a 2010 roundup of
        crowd-sourced transcription, the software engineer and expert on
        crowdsourcing Ben Brumfield noted that Transcribe Bentham has
        done "more than any other transcription tool to publicize the field"
        [3].
    
    Thus, the Project has proven how right Bentham was when he wrote: "Many
        hands make light work. Many hands together make merry work".
    
ImpactSummary

    UCL's Bentham Project has developed an international award winning public
      engagement and knowledge transfer initiative that brings the views of the
      renowned 18th century philosopher and reformer, Jeremy Bentham,
      to life for the modern world. By creating the Bentham Papers Catalogue,
      Digital Database and crowdsourcing project Transcribe Bentham, the
      Project has:
    
      Broken down traditional barriers between the public and academic
        researchers by inviting the public to play a part in complex academic
        research;
      Developed history, IT and analytical skills in thousands of members of
        the public around the world;
      Engaged the public with Bentham's ideas at a time when they are of
        increasing contemporary relevance;
      Speeded up the transcription of Bentham's manuscripts;
      Contributed to the worldwide development of online transcription
        tools.
    
    
UnderpinningResearch

    The Bentham Project was founded at UCL in 1959 to produce the new
      authoritative edition of The Collected Works of Jeremy Bentham
      from the vast collection of Bentham manuscripts in the UCL Special
      Collections. Bentham's views were visionary, and it was recognised that
      they had great significance for contemporary debates on important issues
      such as prison reform, international law, religion, democracy, sexuality
      and animal welfare. The problem confronting the Bentham Project was how to
      decipher the thousands of folios (and millions of words) Bentham had left
      behind.
    Achieving the goal of the Bentham Project requires transcribing and then
      analysing all the manuscripts in the vast collection of Bentham Papers
      held by UCL, as well as those in the British Library. The UCL collection
      forms the main body, with approximately 60,000 folios (c. 30 million
      words). Professor Philip Schofield, Director of the Bentham Project since
      2001, has pioneered an award-winning, innovative approach to solving this
      problem, which harnesses the power of the internet and the public around
      the world to transcribe Bentham's words for the 21st century.
    Bentham Papers Catalogue: The first step was to conduct research
      on the UCL folios to create a catalogue of all the manuscripts.
      Schofield's core research, which has produced 8 volumes of the Collected
        Works [a], provided him with a deep understanding of the manuscripts
      and enabled him to devise the specification for the entire catalogue. From
      2003-06 Schofield designed and led an AHRC-funded project that produced a
      searchable Catalogue [b] of all the Bentham Papers held at UCL, with
      Deborah McVea compiling the catalogue under Schofield's direction.
    Digital Database: With a Catalogue, Schofield then set out to
      create a Digital Database [c] of high quality Bentham manuscript images
      and a transcription tool for online transcription. Under an AHRC grant, in
      2010-11 Schofield worked collaboratively with UCL Library Services (Martin
      Moyle) and UCL Design, Photography and Web Services (Tony Slade) to create
      digital images, and he guided the University of London Computer Centre
      (Richard Davies) in programming a transcription tool according to his
      specification for encoding the manuscript elements. Schofield also led a
      team of Bentham Project Research Associates Justin Tonra (1/5/10-30/9/10),
      Valerie Wallace (12/4/10-31/3/11) and Tim Causer (1/10/10-present) that
      produced a transcription tutorial, Transcription Desk and image viewer.
      Out of this Digital Database came the idea to harness the internet and the
      public to accelerate the pace of transcription (crowdsourcing).
    Transcribe Bentham: Launched in September 2010, the crowdsourcing
      project Transcribe Bentham [d] was formulated as an experiment:
    
      Could volunteers without previous training read and decipher Bentham's
        handwriting and deal with composition and structural features of the
        manuscripts?
      Could the public then mark the manuscripts up in the required encoded
        text language?
      Could the public navigate Bentham's idiosyncratic style and his dense
        and challenging ideas?
      Would the work be of sufficient quality to be used in the Bentham
        Project's editorial work?
    
    Anyone in the world with an internet connection can participate in Transcribe
        Bentham. After registering, participants transcribe Bentham's
      manuscripts into a text box and encode the features of the manuscripts in
      Text Encoding Initiative (TEI) compliant language (XML). Schofield worked
      with UCL Digital Humanities (Melissa Terras) on designing outreach for Transcribe
        Bentham, and his research team conducted follow up research in 2011
      [e] to measure the project's success.
    Having demonstrated that Transcribe Bentham could produce public
      transcription of sufficient quality to serve as a basis for the Bentham
      Project's editorial work, in 2012 Schofield secured funding from the
      Mellon Foundation to create a publicly accessible Digital Repository
      for the Bentham Papers [f]. This includes the British Library Papers, and
      will reunite in digital form the collection broken up at Bentham's death.
      Transcribe Bentham also became part of TranScriptorium in
      2012, a European Commission funded project which uses the Transcribe
        Bentham transcription tool as a prototype for transcription in other
      languages.
    