CaseStudyId: 40593
Title: 
    Improving judicial selection and training in the UK and abroad
    

ImpactDetails

    Empirical research by UCL Laws has influenced fair and meritorious
      selection of judges and judicial professionalism, both of which are
      critical ambitions for legal systems. Our research has been used by the
      judiciary, judicial nominating bodies, policy advisory bodies, judicial
      training bodies, Ministry of Justice, UK Parliament, European Commission
      and International Criminal Court. Although much research on the judiciary
      is inherently highly confidential, the impact of our research has been
      publicly acknowledged by these bodies, as summarised below.
    Informing selection and supporting increased judicial diversity:
      In England and Wales, the new judicial appointments system introduced in
      2006 raised expectations of greater diversity in appointments, but
      progress has been slow. By pinpointing barriers to diversity, research
      commissioned from UCL Laws has had the following impacts:
    
      Genn's senior practitioners' study [a] resulted in better-informed
        outreach work by the Judicial Appointments Commission (JAC) and senior
        judiciary. It identified messages that needed to be communicated to
        under-represented groups such as women, minorities and solicitors. The
        study's finding that the requirement to go on circuit and lack of
        flexible working was for some highly qualified practitioners an absolute
        block on application to the High Court, has led to greater emphasis on
        allowing flexibility regarding circuit requirements and contributed to
        the introduction of legislative provision for flexible working for the
        High Court introduced in April 2013 [13]. Judicial Statistics show a
        significant increase in women appointed to the High Court from 10 in
        2008 (9%) to 18 in 2013 (17%) [5].
      Thomas's recommendation for improved diversity data collection was
        implemented by the JAC and Ministry of Justice in 2010, supporting the
        evaluation of changes in JAC practice and enabling more reliable
        assessment of progress toward diversity (Recommendation 8 in [1]);
      Thomas's research findings on diversity influenced the recommendations
        of the House of Lords Select Committee on the Constitution's 2011
        investigation into Judicial Appointments [3], including shortlists (at
        36), merit (at 70, 73, 95), and membership of the JAC and selection
        committees (at 155) to improve selection processes and produce more
        diverse appointments;
      In 2011, UCLJI created a Judicial Skills CPD course for lawyers
        considering applying for judicial appointment [12]. The Judicial
        Diversity Taskforce relied on this in its 2011 Progress Report [14, p.
        26, 28] and 2012 Progress Report [2, p. 24, 25] as the main evidence
        that Recommendation 14 [1, para. 71] and Recommendation16 [1, para. 81]
        of the Neuberger Panel had been fulfilled.
    
    At the international court level, our research has also influenced
      judicial selection procedures:
    
      Findings and principles from the CICT study were used by the Advisory
        Committee on Nominations of Judges of the International Criminal Court
        in 2011 in drawing up its operating procedures [4] and in 2013 in
        reviewing the processes used by different member states for screening
        potential appointees prior to selection [15].
    
    Influencing judicial education and training in the UK and Europe:
      Genn's judicial training needs research with the judiciary of England
      &amp; Wales [c] and Scotland [f] and Thomas's research on practices in 12
      other jurisdictions [e] led to wide-ranging changes in the design and
      delivery of judicial training [6, p. 7], including:
    
      In 2008 the JSB implemented a new training strategy based on Genn's
        judicial training needs research [7, p. 8] ensuring training is better
        adapted to the development needs of the judiciary. Responses to Genn's
        recommendations include more use of participative learning, modular
        options in continuation training, and a new cross-jurisdictional course
        The Craft of Judging, introduced in 2010 [7, p. 8] and reviewed
        favourably in the press in 2012 [11]. Since 2008, the framework of
        judicial abilities and qualities (JAQ), which Genn drafted from her
        research findings, has been used as the basis for the development of all
        judicial training in England and Wales [8, p. 3] and has been adopted
        abroad [8].
    
    Genn's judicial training needs research and recommendations for change in
      Scotland [f] were accepted and implemented [9, p. i, iii] and led to the:
    
      Development of a new training programme [9, p. 2] and the
        establishment of the Judicial Institute for Scotland (JIS) in 2012
        costing over &#163;900,000, which has transformed the approach and facilities
        for judicial education. In 2013 the JIS commissioned the UCLJI to review
        and evaluate the quality of the training introduced in response to the
        2008 report (to be completed by 2015) [16].
    
    Thomas's review of judicial diversity strategies in other jurisdictions:
    
      Highlighted the need for greater exposure of lawyers to the work of
        judges before applying for appointment and led to the Neuberger Panel
        recommendations that judicial skills training be offered to lawyers
        interested in applying for a judicial post [1, para. 71, 81] and the
        establishment of the UCLJI CPD course Understanding Judging [2,
        12].
    
    Thomas's review of judicial education and training in 12 jurisdictions:
    
      Contributed to the framework and deliverables for all four
        Workpackages in the European Commission "Menu for Justice" Project. From
        2009-13 this Project assessed the key gaps in legal and judicial
        education and produced a database of national reports for all
        twenty-seven European member states [10].
    
    
ImpactSummary

    Judicial studies is a new research field in the UK and operates in the
      highly confidential arena of judicial policy and practice, where the
      impact of research in producing change is often not publicly stated. But
      pioneering empirical work by UCL's Judicial Institute (UCLJI) and Centre
      for International Courts and Tribunals (CICT) has had tangible and
      acknowledged impacts on judicial selection and training policies and
      practices in the UK, Europe and at the international court level. The
      research impacts include:
    
      Improved fairness of judicial selection practices;
      Reduced barriers to judicial diversity;
      Improved data collection on judicial appointments;
      Improved education and training for judges and aspiring judges;
      Improved government, judicial and public understanding of the barriers
        to judicial diversity.
    
    
UnderpinningResearch

    Judicial selection and diversity
    In 2008, the Judicial Executive Board of England and Wales commissioned
      Professor Hazel Genn (Co-Director, UCLJI) to identify factors attracting
      and deterring senior barristers and solicitors from applying for
      appointment to the High Court. Initiated by the Lord Chief Justice to
      inform the outreach strategy of the Judicial Office and the Judicial
      Appointments Commission's review of its appointment procedures, this is
      the only research of its kind in the UK. The study [a], involving
      interviews with serving judiciary and practitioners, revealed that:
    
      Key attractions of High Court appointment include intellectual
        challenge, opportunity to shape the law, prestige and commitment to
        public service;
      Key deterrents disproportionately affecting women and primary carers
        were the requirement for High Court judges to spend several weeks in
        courts out of London every year, the lack of flexibility and isolation
        of the role.
    
    Prompted by concerns over the slow progress toward increasing diversity
      in the English and Welsh judiciary, in 2009 the Lord Chancellor's Advisory
      Panel on Judicial Diversity commissioned Professor Cheryl Thomas
      (Co-Director, UCLJI) to conduct research analysing the effectiveness of
      judicial diversity strategies in other jurisdictions with those in the UK.
      This study [b] found that:
    
      Other jurisdictions had implemented more pro-active strategies to
        address diversity;
      Strategies are most successful when directed at specific judicial
        levels;
      The Judicial Appointments Commission's unique rules work against
        increasing diversity;
      Judicial diversity data in England and Wales were deficient and
        unreliable.
    
    In 2008-09, the UCL CICT was funded by the AHRC to conduct research on
      judicial selection in the International Court of Justice (ICJ) and
      International Criminal Court (ICC). The team was led by Professor Philippe
      Sands, Director of CICT, and included researchers from CICT and Queen Mary
      University. Using interviews, case studies and survey data, the study [c]
      found that:
    
      Selection of international court judges is often controlled by small
        groups of diplomats, civil servants, lawyers and academics.
      This politicises the process, works against the selection of the most
        highly qualified candidates and undermines judicial independence.
    
    Judicial education and training
      England and Wales: In 2006 the Judicial Studies Board (JSB), as
      part of their Training Strategy Review, commissioned Genn to undertake an
      empirical study of the training needs of the English judiciary and to
      develop a Framework of Judicial Abilities and Qualities (JAQ) to
      support the JSB's strategic objective to improve standards and integrate
      diversity issues into the design and delivery of training. The study
      involved focus group discussions and individual interviews with over 500
      District, Circuit and High Court judges. The 2006 report [d] identified
      the challenges faced by the judiciary, their development needs and
      training preferences. Key findings were that:
    
      There should be a greater emphasis on judicial skills development and
        the use of problem-based participative learning;
      Training in cross-jurisdictional judgecraft skills should be made
        available;
      Training should be more flexible and better geared to judges'
        individual needs.
    
    From this, Genn developed a JAQ, which was distributed for consultation
      to the judiciary and key interested parties (including the Judicial
      Executive Board, Bar Council and Law Society), and after receiving wide
      approval was published by the JSB in 2008.
    Scotland: Following the England &amp; Wales study, in 2007 Genn
      was commissioned to conduct similar research for the Scottish Judicial
      Studies Committee (JSC). This involved observing judicial training and
      discussion groups with 90 serving judiciary at all levels (comprising
      one-third of the Scottish judiciary). The final report was published in
      August 2008 [f].
    Europe: As part of the JSB 2006&#8212;09 review of judicial training,
      Thomas was commissioned to conduct a review of judicial training and
      education in 12 other jurisdictions. This involved surveys and interviews
      with training leaders and judges in 9 European jurisdictions plus
      Australia, the US and Canada. The report [e] identified how training
      structures and evaluation approaches in jurisdictions affected training
      methods, content and barriers. Based on this report, in 2009 Thomas was
      commissioned to help design the framework for the European Commission Menu
        for Justice Project. From 2009-13 the Project assessed judicial
      education and training gaps in the 27 member states and created a database
      of national reports.
    