CaseStudyId: 40597
Title: 
    Influencing law, policy and practice in jury trials in the UK and
        abroad
    

ImpactDetails

    Those benefiting from the research are numerous and varied, including:
      the judiciary of England and Wales, HMCTS, MoJ, Judicial College, Law
      Commission of England and Wales, criminal law professionals, public as
      serving jurors and defendants in serious criminal trials. The research [a,
      b] has been widely covered in the press and generated substantial public
      debate [13]. It has also been highlighted by the senior judiciary as
      influential in judicial thinking about the future of trial by jury in this
      country [3] and been used in reviews of the jury system in other
      jurisdictions, e.g. Northern Ireland, the Republic of Ireland and the US
      [7, 9, 10]. Benefits arising from the research include:
    
      Resolving long-standing concerns about the need for: racially balanced
        juries, anonymity for those accused of rape, and change in upper age
        limit for jury service;
      Reforming official government reporting of conviction rates;
      Prompting re-evaluation of judges' use of written directions;
      Helping to prevent improper juror conduct and improve deliberations;
      Influencing Law Commission proposals on reforms of contempt and
        insanity laws.
    
    Racially-balanced juries: Are Juries Fair? [a] resolved
      long-standing concerns that racially balanced juries are needed to ensure
      fairness in trials of ethnic minority defendants through its robust
      evidence that all-White juries do not discriminate against ethnic minority
      defendants. Previous reviews (Auld Review and the Runciman Commission) had
      recommended racially balanced juries, but acknowledged that they did so in
      the absence of reliable research, and this research has resulted in
      abandonment of proposals to artificially construct racially mixed juries
      [1].
    Re-evaluation of juries and rape cases: The research [a] also
      provided robust empirical evidence that, contrary to popular belief and
      previous official reports, juries convict more often than they acquit in
      rape. These findings were cited in the independent review of how public
      authorities handle rape complaints (Stern Review 2010), and were relied on
      in the report's conclusion that it was not realistic to achieve a much
      higher jury conviction rate in rape cases [4, pp. 15, 16, 43, 91, 92, 94].
      The research findings on jury conviction rates in rape cases and media
      coverage of jury trials [a] were further relied upon in the 2010
      government review on providing anonymity for those accused of rape [5, p.
      vi, 19, 20, 21, 23, 32, 33].
    Official reporting of conviction rates: Are Juries Fair?
      [a] identified that official conviction rates in Crown Courts do not
      distinguish between guilty pleas and verdicts decided by a jury and can
      therefore provide misleading information about conviction rates. This was
      relied upon in the Stern Review's call for a re-evaluation of how official
      conviction rates for rape are reported, and the recommendation that the
      publication of crime statistics always be accompanied by enough
      explanation to ensure that their meaning can be widely understood and
      makes clear what conclusions can and cannot be drawn from those data [4,
      pp. 10, 18, 32, 33]. It was also relied on by the MoJ in its decision to
      work with the National Statistician to clarify rape conviction rates and
      review how conviction rates are measured in official government
      statistical bulletins for all offences [5, p. vi, 19, 20, 21, 23].
    Re-evaluation of the use of written legal directions: The findings
      that juror comprehension of legal directions can be substantially improved
      when a written summary is provided at the same time as the judge gives
      oral legal directions to the jury [a] and that jurors prefer written
      directions [b] has prompted a re-evaluation of the use of written
      directions by the judiciary in England and Wales. In 2010 the Court of
      Appeal relied on the findings [a] in R v Thompson et al in the
      guidance it provided to the judiciary on using written directions [2,
      para. 13, 94], and it is now common practice for written directions to be
      used in most jury trials in England and Wales. The Irish Law Reform
      Commission also relied on this research [a] in recommending that jurors
      should have written information provided to them in all cases to aid
      comprehension [9, para. 10.24-10.26].
    Upper age limit for jury service: Findings [a] on the ability of
      jurors from different age groups to comprehend judicial instructions, and
      analysis of the proportion of each age group serving as jurors at each
      Crown Court in England and Wales was relied upon by the government in
      considering whether to raise the upper age limit for jury service to 75
      [6, p.19]. This research was also relied upon by the Northern Ireland
      Department of Justice in its 2011 Consultation Paper examining whether
      there should be an upper age limit for jurors [7, pp. 3, 34, 56, 62].
    Insanity defence: The Law Commission relied upon the research
      finding [c] that jury verdicts of "not guilty by reason of insanity" are
      extremely rare in deciding in 2012 that it could not proceed directly with
      proposals to reform the insanity defence law [11, para. 1.3 and 1.4]. This
      resulted in the Law Commission taking the unusual step of issuing a
      "scoping paper" to find out how the defence operates in practice [12,
      para. 1.23, 1.40, 1.44].
    Contempt, the media and improper juror conduct: The research
      findings on improper juror conduct [a, b] have had far-reaching impacts on
      jury reforms in this jurisdiction and abroad. Findings that a substantial
      proportion of jurors were uncertain what to do about improper conduct [a]
      were relied upon in the Court of Appeal's 2010 judgment, R v Thompson
        et al, in which it recommended that HMCTS should consult the
      Judicial College on how best to explain to jurors their collective
      responsibility, and that judges should direct juries on their collective
      responsibility as part of their initial remarks to the jury after they
      were sworn [2, para. 7, 8]. Findings on juror use of the internet [a] have
      also been relied upon by:
    
      The Law Commission for England and Wales in its 2013 review of
        Contempt of Court in proposals for reducing contempts committed by
        jurors involving use of the intent and modern media [8, para. 1.9, 2.25,
        4.16, 4.23, 4.28, 4.55];
      The Irish Law Reform Commission in proposals that specific statutory
        provisions and administrative arrangements be put in place to reduce the
        risk of inappropriate juror use of the internet [9, para. 8.18, 8.19,
        8.24];
      The US National Center for State Courts in its review of jurors' use
        of new media, citing the research as the only systematically-based
        estimate of juror misconduct anywhere in the world [10, p.3].
    
    
ImpactSummary

    Research by the UCL Jury Project has directly influenced government and
      judicial policies and practices and public debate both in the UK and
      abroad. It has:
    
      identified the need for reform and solutions to problems (on juror
        internet use, deliberation guidance, judicial directions and government
        reporting of conviction rates);
      influenced judicial thinking and decision-making (on directing juries
        and trial by jury in the internet age);
      influenced law reform proposals in the UK and abroad (on contempt,
        improper juror conduct and the insanity defence);
      influenced government policy decisions (on upper age limit for jury
        service and anonymity for rape defendants);
      contributed to improving the quality of debate about trial by jury
        (through wide-spread media coverage of the research).
    
    
UnderpinningResearch

    The operation of the jury system is a highly confidential and
      under-researched area. The UCL Jury
    Project, led by Project Director Professor Cheryl Thomas, conducts
      empirical research with actual juries at Crown Courts in England and Wales
      and has pioneered the study of the jury system in this country. Since the
      Project's establishment in 2007, Thomas has carried out ground-breaking
      studies of juries tackling sensitive and controversial issues for the
      first time here and elsewhere.
    In 2007 the Ministry of Justice (MoJ) commissioned Thomas to conduct
      empirical research on a question posed by her previous jury research
      (conducted prior to her joining UCL):
    
      Do all-White juries discriminate against ethnic minority defendants?
    
    After consultation with the senior judiciary, Her Majesty's Courts
      Service (now HMCTS), MoJ, Home Office and the Attorney General, Thomas
      expanded the scope of the research to address other issues of
      long-standing concern:
    
      Do juries rarely convict at certain courts or on certain offences?
      Do jurors understand the jury process?
      What influence do the media have on jurors?
    
    Conducted from 2007 to 2009, the research employed a rigorous,
      multi-method approach using:
    
      Case simulation with real juries at Crown Courts (797 jurors on 68
        juries)
      Large-scale analysis of all actual jury verdicts in all Crown Courts
        in England and Wales in 2006-08 (over 500,000 charges and over 68,000
        jury verdicts)
      Post-verdict survey of juries at court (668 jurors in 62 cases)
    
    The findings, published in the 2010 report Are Juries Fair? [a],
      exposed numerous myths about juries, showed that juries overall are
      effective and efficient but need better tools to do their job:
    
      all-White juries do not discriminate against ethnic minority
        defendants;
      juries convict more often than acquit in rape cases;
      written directions improve juror comprehension of the law;
      the "fade factor" exists: jurors are least likely to recall media
        reports the further away they are from trial;
      some jurors look for information about their case on the internet
        during trial despite judicial directions against this;
      almost half of jurors do not know or are uncertain what to do about
        improper juror conduct;
      most jurors want more information about how to conduct jury
        deliberations.
    
    The findings on improper conduct and jury deliberations led to a
      multi-stage follow-up study funded by ESRC and conducted in collaboration
      with HMCTS, the senior judiciary and MoJ. Stage 1, conducted in 2011-13,
      used post-verdict surveys to assess how jurors use the internet, their
      understanding of improper conduct and what type of deliberation guidance
      would be helpful. This research [b] found that:
    
      75% of jurors understand the internet use rule;
      25% of jurors would be uncomfortable reporting another juror's misuse
        of the internet;
      8% use the internet in a legally problematic way;
      Jurors are overwhelmingly in favour of written directions.
    
    In 2011 the Law Commission requested an additional study from Thomas on
      jury verdicts and the insanity defence for its review of insanity and
      automatism. The study [c] found that:
    
      jury verdicts of not guilty by reason of insanity are extremely rare
        (0.1% of verdicts);
      defendants in these cases have a similar profile to defendants in all
        jury trials;
      but the defence is used in cases involving a narrow range of offences.
    
    