CaseStudyId: 40701
Title: 
    Reanimating cultural heritage in Sierra Leone
    

ImpactDetails

    Sierra Leone is one of the poorest countries in the world;
      unsurprisingly, cultural heritage is not a high priority there, and
      institutions such as the Sierra Leone National Museum (SLNM) are
      desperately under-resourced and lacking in expertise. While schools are
      aware of the importance of incorporating culture and history into their
      teaching, there is an almost total lack of educational resources to
      facilitate this. Outside the country, by contrast, an abundance of Sierra
      Leonean artefacts, photographs, sound recordings, and associated
      knowledges are dispersed in museums and archives around the world. Through
      participatory action research and the development of an innovative digital
      resource [1] RCH has `virtually repatriated' and reanimated these
      collections. Through this website and a sustained programme of associated
      outreach, advocacy and capacity-building in Sierra Leone's heritage and
      education sectors, the project has contributed to the preservation and
      conservation of Sierra Leonean cultural resources; supported the
      development of the country's museums sector offering; created new and
      improved existing educational resources; and engaged Sierra Leonean and
      international audiences with the country's cultural heritage.
    Providing new access to museum collections, images and sound archives:
      Launched in October 2011, www.sierraleoneheritage.org
      was a key output of the RCH project. The resource provides global digital
      access to over 4,000 Sierra Leonean objects, images and sound recordings
      from the British Museum (BM), Brighton Museum, Glasgow Museum, World
      Museum Liverpool, British Library Sound Archive, and Cootje van Oven
      ethnomusicological collection. This material was largely hidden away in
      museum stores and low on museums' priority lists. Participation in the
      project meant that these museums prioritised the digitisation of these
      collections, providing access to much of the material for the first time
      [1]. Additionally, c. 2,000 objects from SLNM collections - which
      previously had no accurate record of its collection &#8212; were digitised.
      Beyond providing access to the objects, this complete written and visual
      record of the collection significantly improved its security [2]. It not
      only provides access to images and information, but reanimates objects by
      juxtaposing them with contextualising video and sound media showing them
      in use, being made, or discussed [3, 4]. From January 2012, when visitor
      statistics began to be recorded, to date the digital resource received
      99,470 page views from 19,288 unique visitors. Related project videos on
      YouTube have been particularly popular, with examples receiving 9,776 and
      5,622 views each [6].
    Enhancing the profile of the Sierra Leone National Museum and cultural
        heritage sector, both within and beyond Sierra Leone: Whereas SLNM
      was previously regarded by many, including some within Sierra Leone's
      Ministry of Tourism and Cultural Affairs, as moribund and of little
      interest, the activities of RCH and its various partnerships transformed
      the Museum into a vibrant hub of activity, with new displays and outreach
      activities [2]. This has had a significant impact on its perception among
      the Sierra Leone Government and public. The Director of Cultural Affairs
      acknowledged that his understanding of the Museum has been changed through
      participation in the project, and that he has come to recognise the
      importance of its collections and the contribution it can make to national
      development [5]. There is increased press coverage of the Museum [8], more
      high level functionaries at openings and events, and a change in
      employment conditions for SLNM staff, the Museum's higher profile having
      resulted in a change to the way in which they are paid. Previously, staff
      received a subvention included as an undifferentiated part of the museum's
      annual funding, which typically meant that they went unpaid for months at
      a time. This was changed in 2012, such that the Museum's 16 staff are now
      paid salaries directly from Government, as any other civil servant. More
      widely, an annual week-long Cultural Festival was instituted in April
      2011, and the President has indicated that the Ministry of Tourism and
      Cultural Affairs will receive additional funding to develop cultural
      tourism [5].
    Prior to their participation in RCH, there was relatively little interest
      in the Sierra Leonean collections held by the project's international
      partner museums, including the British Museum; the project has encouraged
      these museums to reassess the significance of their collections. As a
      direct outcome of the collaboration, the BM held a 3-month exhibition
      focusing exclusively on Sierra Leonean collections which attracted
      approximately 67,000 visitors between 14 February and 28 April 2013, and
      received much positive feedback [3]. The display was selected in 2013 for
      the BM's `History of the World' tour to Abu Dhabi, Japan and Taiwan in
      2014 [3, 11]. In January and February 2012, the BM and SLNM were partners
      in a larger, multi-sited exhibition at UCL, which focused on different
      aspects of the RCH project. This included the loan of 19 Sierra Leonean
      objects from the BM, and the first ever international loan of objects from
      SLNM [12].
    Research has thus made an important contribution to challenging negative
      stereotypes about Sierra Leone by engaging international communities, as
      well as Sierra Leoneans themselves, with the country's history and
      heritage beyond the dominant images of child soldiers, `blood diamonds'
      and poverty. As the Director of Cultural Affairs described the digital
      resource, this is a `powerful tool in changing perceptions of Sierra
      Leone', with the ability to `change the mindsets of people' [5].
    Capacity-building in the museum and heritage sector in Sierra Leone:
    From March 2009, as part of the digitisation process, the project provided a
    sustained programme of training and capacity-building at SLNM for a museum
    `working party' of 8-10 staff members from SLNM, the Monuments and Relics
    Commission, and Ministry of Tourism and Cultural Affairs. This developed
    capacity in a wide range of museum skills including conducting a collections
    audit, cataloguing the objects using a computerised collections management
    system, setting up a photographic studio and taking high quality digital
    photographs of objects, and improving preventative conservation and storage
    techniques. As the senior curator at SLNM explains, `what was especially
    valuable about the training and capacity building work we undertook as part
    of [RCH] was that it was based in our own institution and took into
    consideration the constraints with which we are daily faced. The
    activities...strengthened the professional capacity of the museum staff by
    adapting international standards of best practice in the context of our own
    work' [2]. This training was enhanced through a partnership brokered by RCH
    with the British Museum's Africa Programme, for which Paul Basu acted as
    consultant. This ongoing programme of workshops and collaborative
    initiatives on site included the redisplay of SLNM's permanent galleries,
    museum education programmes, collaborative exhibitions, and
    knowledge-exchange visits [2, 3, 5].
    Developing resources for teaching and educational outreach:
      Although school groups sometimes visited SLNM, little attempt was
      previously made to enhance their use of the Museum as a learning space.
      This was particularly unfortunate since there is no provision for the
      teaching of Sierra Leonean culture or heritage within the national
      curriculum and no existing teaching resources [4, 9]. Through RCH, various
      initiatives were developed to strengthen the relationship between schools
      and SLNM: 200 stand-alone DVD versions of the digital heritage resource
      were distributed to schools, colleges, universities and community `access
      points' in Freetown and other towns where computers were available but
      internet access was inadequate. In October 2011 a workshop was organised
      in association with the British Council's `Connecting Classrooms'
      initiative at which c. 60 Sierra Leonean teachers and 30 British teachers
      explored the educational value of the resource, which was very positively
      received and has since been extensively used [4, 9]. Prompted by the
      availability of this high-quality teaching resource, several teachers have
      gone on to establish `history clubs' at their schools [4, 9]. Following on
      from this initial educational outreach, a Teachers' Forum was launched at
      SLNM in June 2012. At a workshop for 25 teachers, led in collaboration
      with the BM Africa Programme, teachers and museum staff explored ways in
      which the Sierra Leone National Museum could support the teaching of
      culture and history in schools. A steering committee was formed and future
      meetings of the Forum arranged [4, 7, 9]. This was a significant step in
      building effective relationships between teachers and museum staff,
      opening up the Museum to a wider range of educational uses [2, 3, 4, 9].
    Engaging Sierra Leonean and diasporic communities in the value of
        cultural heritage: As part of RCH, much community outreach work was
      undertaken, collecting oral histories, exploring local understandings of
      the value of history and cultural heritage, and discussing sustainable
      approaches to safeguarding heritage sites. This on-going work was used to
      advise the Monuments and Relics Commission on locally-appropriate forms of
      cultural heritage management. In the UK, RCH collaborated with the BM
      Communities Team in a week-long object-based workshop as part of its
      `Talking Objects' programme (Sep 2011). Working with 18 young members of
      the diaspora in London, this used objects from the BM collection to
      facilitate explorations of their cultural heritage and identity [3, 10].
      Community participation was also key to the development of exhibitions and
      events programmes at the BM and UCL: the Sowei mask: spirit of Sierra
        Leone display (Feb-April 2013, with community involvement from July
      2012) at the BM involved close collaboration with a London-based Sierra
      Leonean cultural group, who performed a traditional mask naming ceremony
      at the Museum prior to its exhibition [11]. At the opening, members of the
      diaspora community performed dances and masquerades at a free public event
      attended by over 1,000 people. The closing event was co-hosted with the
      Sierra Leonean High Commission as an Independence Day celebration,
      introducing this cultural heritage to a wider diplomatic community [3].
    
ImpactSummary

    Research led by Paul Basu at UCL has explored cultural heritage in
      post-conflict development in Sierra Leone. The 2009-12 Reanimating
      Cultural Heritage project (RCH) has engaged in a sustained programme of
      outreach, advocacy, and capacity building in Sierra Leone's cultural and
      educational sectors. With partners in the UK and Sierra Leone, it has
      developed an innovative digital resource connecting diasporas of museum
      objects, images and sounds with diasporas of people, and provides new
      access to collections. RCH has contributed to the reanimation of Sierra
      Leone's National Museum and has mobilised cultural heritage as a wider
      social resource.
    
UnderpinningResearch

    Paul Basu (Reader in Material Culture and Museum Studies since January
      2009) has been engaged in a long-term research project mapping Sierra
      Leone's `cultural memoryscape'. This extends beyond sites and practices in
      the country's rural interior to encompass a diversity of mnemonic locales,
      including the cultural imaginings of diasporic populations [a, b]. An
      important museological dimension is the exploration of the status, value
      and affordances of Sierra Leonean objects dispersed in museum collections
      and colonial archives around the world, and consideration of the
      relationship between these `object diasporas' and corresponding `human
      diasporas' [c].
    Within this context, the Reanimating Cultural Heritage project (RCH) &#8212;
      set up by Basu in February 2009 &#8212; sought to investigate the potential of
      museum collections to contribute to Sierra Leone's post-conflict recovery
      and challenge negative stereotypes associated with the country
      internationally. The project was informed by `action research' methods
      drawn from development practice, which engages a wide range of
      stakeholders in a shared learning process. It brought together key
      institutions including Sierra Leone's Ministry of Tourism and Cultural
      Affairs, Monuments and Relics Commission and National Museum with local
      NGOs, civil society groups, and UK museums/archives in a sustained
      programme of participative research, outreach, advocacy and
      capacity-building with different partners, stakeholders and publics.
    An important aspect of RCH was its testing of recent museological theory.
      In particular, the project drew upon interdisciplinary work on
      transnationalism and diaspora to think beyond essentialised `nativist'
      sensibilities that frequently underpin debates over cultural patrimony to
      consider the `migratory' nature of material culture. Applying recent
      debates on the economic value of `remittances' by diasporic populations to
      erstwhile homelands, the project considered what value (economic,
      symbolic, and so on) may be returned by Sierra Leonean objects dispersed
      in European and North American museums [c]. Through its participatory and
      process-orientated approach, the project demonstrated how working with
      historical collections can reanimate heritage institutions in the present,
      and develop their capacity to contribute to a wider societal reanimation
      in the future [d].
    A key output of RCH was an innovative digital heritage resource, www.sierraleoneheritage.org
      [e], which provides free public access to hitherto inaccessible Sierra
      Leonean collections held by project partners including the Sierra Leone
      National Museum (SLNM) itself. One objective was to explore how museum
      collections could be brought to life by juxtaposing them with
      contextualising media, including video, sound and images: thus, for
      example, a static wooden mask is reanimated by juxtaposing it with footage
      of associated performances. Between 2010 and 2011 more than 60 videos were
      produced collaboratively with Sierra Leonean NGOs. The resource was
      developed in partnership with Sussex University Department of Informatics
      and uses social media to create a virtual meeting space for a scattered
      community. Dr Martin White (Reader in Computer Science, University of
      Sussex) was the Co-Investigator and collaborated on the technical
      development of the website, which included innovative approaches to the
      integration of social network platforms.
    