CaseStudyId: 40937
Title:     The Mirrlees Review: Influencing policy and debate on tax and benefit        reform    

ImpactDetails
    The research described in section 2 has stimulated and fundamentally      changed the public and policy debate about taxation, and has had direct      consequences for tax legislation in the United Kingdom. A key example of      this was the publication of the Mirrlees Review of Tax Reform      established by the ESRC Centre, under the direction of Richard Blundell      and underpinned by his research, which has had a significant impact on tax      and benefit reform in the UK and abroad.    Each volume of the report was received with widespread acclaim in the      major news outlets. On 18 September 2011, the Financial Times ran      a glowing lead editorial on the policy recommendations of the Review,      ending: `Were Mr Osborne to pursue such aims, he would do Britain a      service', echoing the Economist's enthusiastic appraisal a year      earlier [1]. While Larry Summers, the then US Treasury Secretary (and      Professor at Harvard University) wrote in 2010, on the release of the      first volume: `Theory and practice rarely are brought together      effectively. It should be read by anyone who cares about the future of      taxation &#8212; that is anyone who cares about the future of government'      (quoted in [e] in section 3).    The publication of the first volume was an important factor in the Treasury
        Select Committee's decision to launch an important inquiry into the        principles of tax policy. On 24 November 2010, the Select Committee      wrote: `In the last month, the Institute for Fiscal Studies in London and      the OECD have each published important reports into the fundamentals of      tax policy. The Mirrlees Review, published by the IFS, argues that      the tax system should be considered as a whole with the benefit system,      seek neutrality, and achieve progressivity as efficiently as possible. The      Treasury Committee has decided to launch its own inquiry into the      principles which should underpin the tax system' [2].    After the final volume of the report was launched, Blundell delivered      specific presentations of the tax reform proposals from this research to      various policy audiences in the UK and abroad, ensuring that the research      made an integral contribution to debate on tax policy reform. These      included, for example, discussions with the following audiences:    - Oral testimony to HM Treasury in the UK (25 January 2011) [3];    - European Union Tax Commissioners (29 November 2011);    - The International Monetary Fund (22 November 2011).    The Review is now an intrinsic part of policy discussion      regarding tax reform in the UK and abroad, and is routinely cited in      policy reports and in the media. The launch of each volume was covered in      the press, and the findings are regularly referred to, e.g. in articles in      the Telegraph as recently as September 2012 and March 2013 [4].      Some key examples of its use in policy are described below.    The Review provided the foundation evidence, presented by      Professor Blundell and colleagues, for the influential Treasury Select      Committee Report on Principles of Tax Policy published on 10 March 2011.      The proposals on earnings tax reform in the Mirrlees Review, which      were based on Blundell's research, formed the key evidence for the        Treasury Committee Report, Principles of Tax Policy, 2011 (see      especially p. 11 of [3]) which used it as a framework to formulate its own      recommendations.    Similarly, the Office of Tax Simplification, which was mandated with      assessing the worth of the UK's tax allowances and relief in 2010-11,      relied heavily on the Mirrlees Review as a far more exhaustive      assessment of the overall tax system (p. 5), as well as in discussing      specific aspects such as inheritance tax (p. 15) (for which it recommended      a top-down review, following the conclusions of the Review) and      corporation tax [4]. This report was presented to the Chancellor to inform      the 2011 Budget.    The research not only helped make the original business case for the        Universal Credit reform introduced as part of the Welfare Reform Act      2012, but also had direct impact on the design of the reform. This      reform involved a complete redesign of the benefit and tax credit system      in the UK, involving some &#163;55bn of government expenditure impacting on      more than 8 million families, with a limited rollout beginning from April      2013. As HM Treasury writes, `Professor Blundell's micro-econometric      research on labour supply and the tax and benefit system has directly      influenced UK economic analysis and policy making with respect to the      design of tax, tax-credit and benefit integration reforms. For example we      have drawn on his work in considering the business case for Universal      Credit, the Government's flagship reform of the welfare system, and in      other modelling and analysis of the welfare system and labour market to      inform policy thinking and advice to ministers' [5].    In June 2012, Blundell was invited by Lord Freud (Minister for Welfare)      to join a high level Universal Credit Evaluation Committee at the      Department of Work and Pensions. This committee meets regularly to      actively monitor and critically assess the roll out of Universal        Credit, according to a Universal Credit Evaluation Framework      released in December 2012 [6]. Given the delays with the roll out, this      committee plays an essential role. As the department's Permanent Secretary      confirms, `Professor Blundell's micro-econometric research on labour      supply and the tax and benefit system is one of the Department's primary      sources for understanding the possible employment impacts of the new      Universal Credit' [7].    The research has also influenced policy debate in Europe. For      instance, in 2010, the CPB Netherlands Bureau for Economic Policy Analysis      (CPB) at that country's Ministry of Finance announced that a Study      Committee on Taxation had been established, `inspired by the Mirrlees        Review', and charged with offering a broad review of the Dutch tax      system and proposing directions for reform.' The study group published its      recommendations in April 2010 [8].    In recognition of the contribution of Blundell's research, in 2012 he was      awarded the Prize in Labor Economics by the German institute for the study      of labour, IZA, for `his path-breaking contributions to the econometric      analysis of labor markets and public policy reforms.' It added: `Professor      Blundell has played a major role in the development of modern labor and      policy analysis. His work has been enormously influential in the worldwide      debates about tax and welfare reforms over the past decades.' This came      shortly after the IZA itself proposed a tax reform for Germany `which is      based largely on the methodology developed by Richard Blundell' [9].    
ImpactSummary
    The research carried out by Professor Richard Blundell transformed      understanding of the responsiveness of labour supply to tax and welfare      reform, and fundamentally changed the public debate about taxation. This      was achieved most clearly through the Mirrlees Review of Tax Reform,      co-authored by Professor Blundell, and through publications that provided      the key scientific evidence behind the tax rate, tax credit and benefit      integration proposals. These proposals had substantive impact on policy      reform at home and abroad, ranging from public debate on the fundamental      principles of taxation to immediate impact on tax and welfare reform      legislation, such as the business case for the Universal Credit reform.    
UnderpinningResearch
    In 1984, Professor Richard Blundell set up the Microeconometric Research      Laboratory at UCL, which initiated a new generation of pioneering      microeconometric research in the empirical analysis of tax and welfare      policy. In 1991 he established the ESRC Research Centre for the      Microeconomic Analysis of Public Policy at the Institute for Fiscal      Studies (IFS) that used this rigorous microeconomic research to inform the      tax policy debate. This research was supported at UCL by the award of a      six-year Leverhulme Professorial Research Fellowship in 1998.    A key publication from this research was a paper [a, in section 3 below]      by Richard Blundell (UCL), Costas Meghir (UCL 1985-present) and Alan      Duncan (Centre Research Fellow, 1993-present) entitled `Estimating Labour      Supply Responses Using Tax Policy Reforms' and published in Econometrica      in 1998. This paper established a robust method for estimation and      produced new estimates for labour supply elasticities in the UK. It won      the Frisch Prize in 2000 awarded to the best applied paper published in Econometrica,      the most prestigious international refereed journal in econometrics. This      research was subsequently developed [b] to establish clear differences in      labour supply behaviour at the extensive and intensive margins.    This research was put to work in the tax policy context in the 2001      Keynes Lecture by Professor Blundell [c], the annual British Academy      Public Lecture in Economics presented to a wide policy audience, and also      in a 2000 paper on the impact of the then-proposed Working Family Tax      Credit reform [d]. This work was described as `a remarkable combination of      academic excellence and policy relevance' in the statement of the IZA      Prize in Labour Economics, the leading international prize in labour      economics, awarded to Blundell in 2012.    This work by Blundell, his colleagues and his students provided new and      robust microeconometric methods for estimating labour supply parameters      from individual micro-data. These new methods allowed for unobserved      heterogeneity across families, fixed costs of work, and for stigma costs      in the take-up of tax-credits and welfare benefits. Using micro-data from      the UK over a long period of time, publications [a-c] are considered to      have established the key facts on the responses of labour supply to tax      reform. The methodology developed there and the estimated elasticities      from that work have been used extensively in tax and welfare policy design      and analysis, both in the UK and abroad. The research uncovered robust      estimates of the differences in labour supply response by family type, the      key role of stigma costs and the importance of distinguishing between      impacts of employment and weekly hours worked.    This research underpinned the analysis and recommendations of the Mirrlees
        Review, published in two volumes in 2010 and 2011 by the Institute      for Fiscal Studies [e, f]. This review used Blundell's research to show      how to improve the design of tax credit and benefit policy reforms for      low-wage workers, particularly families with children. The research papers      [a-d] described above provided the scientific evidence for the      recommendations on the tax rate, tax credit and benefit integration      proposals in the Review. The final report was launched by      Professors Richard Blundell and James Mirrlees (Cambridge) at the      Institute for Government in 2011.    