CaseStudyId: 40931
Title: 
    Influencing policy debate on immigration and its impacts on the UK
    

ImpactDetails

    Research on the impact of immigration on public finances [c] filled a
      perceived gap in public knowledge and also led to significant
        influence on public debate in the UK. Public debate on immigration
      is often highly emotional and partisan: by providing undisputed evidence
      and clear figures on the effects of immigration, the research challenged
      unfounded claims and meant that interest groups had to engage with the
      evidence, thus influencing the tone and nature of the public debate. The
      importance of this debate is exemplified by the dispute in the months
      running up to the full access of Bulgarians and Romanians to the EU labour
      market starting from January 2014, and the impact that may have on UK
      public finances. Previously, no work existed that had examined the impact
      of A8 immigration on UK public finances since 2004, and the debate was
      dominated by anecdotes and best guesses, often vastly exaggerating the
      burden that A8 migration imposed on the public purse. Our work [c] changed
      that debate by providing well-researched evidence that could not be (and
      has not been) disputed. The results of the research have been referred
        to both in discussion within the broader media and in House of Commons
        debates, as the only conclusive evidence on the fiscal impact of A8
      immigration (see e.g. [6]).
    The methodological innovations and empirical plausibility of our results
      led to the work [a, b] being more broadly influential in policy discussion
      regarding the economic impact of immigration in the UK. The research thus
      provided an important challenge to conventional wisdom, and has been
        frequently cited in policy debate. As the sole source of factual
      evidence on the effects of immigration on wages and fiscal impact of
      immigration, the research has been cited by government bodies and in
      various policy documents, Parliamentary debates and inquiries, and the
      media.
    Impact on government bodies
      The work in question relating to labour market impact [a], though
      subsequently developed and published in a leading academic journal [b],
      was initially commissioned for the specific purpose of advising the Low
      Pay Commission (LPC) on implications of migration for the setting of the
      minimum wage. Our work addressed these key questions by developing new
      methodology to analyse the impact of migration around the 5th percentile
      of the wage distribution, around where the minimum wage is set.
    As the LPC's Chief Economist confirms, this research provided
        important insights that aided the commission when setting the minimum
        wage in 2007. Specifically, it "re-assured Commissioners that
      minimum wage was providing an effective floor in the face of major changes
      to the labour market as a result of increases in migration ... and
      continues to influence the decisions of Commissioners" [1]. Concern about
      the impact of recent increases in migration was a theme noted in earlier
      reports and specifically addressed by the commissioned research [2],
      feeding, along with other commissioned research, into the decision to
      recommend a rise in the minimum wage from &#163;5.35 to &#163;5.52 in October 2007,
      affecting an estimated 1.3 million low-paid workers in October 2007 to
      October 2008.
    More recently, the most important and influential official investigation
      into the impact of immigration on the UK economy conducted under the
      Coalition government was the January 2012 report of the Migration Advisory
      Committee [6], which, again, refers repeatedly to the research in that
      report [a]. The research is now widely recognised as the only informed
      source of knowledge on this particularly important aspect of immigration
      policy, and led to the commissioning of a further report [d] to inform the
      Migration Advisory Committee publication mentioned above [6].
    Influence on Select Committee inquiry and Parliamentary debate
      A report for a House of Lords Select Committee inquiry into the economic
      effects of immigration was published in April 2008 [3]. This was the first
      comprehensive examination into the way immigration has impacted on the UK
      economy and its citizens. It drew together all the existing empirical
      evidence and interviewed a large number of experts on the subject and
      significantly influenced the debate on migration in the years to come [4].
      This referred repeatedly to [a, c] above (7 times to [a] and 7 times to
      [c]), as well as evidence Dustmann and Preston were invited to give to the
      Select Committee the preceding October. It noted our finding of an overall
      positive wage effect but also the lowering of wages in the lowest paid
      jobs. The report also recognised the finding from earlier work that "if
      there is an impact of immigration on unemployment then it is statistically
      poorly determined and probably small in size." Indeed, our work on
      migration figures prominently in the evidence on which the report was
      based [3] and in the Government's response [5], and it greatly enhanced
      the impact of our findings on the effects of immigration on the public and
      policy debate.
    The research has figured in debates within the House of Commons in
      relation to the minimum wage and cited, for example, by the then Secretary
      of State for Business, Enterprise and Regulatory Reform to answer
      questions in 2008 on the impact of immigration on wages [7]. It has been
      recognised as the leading research allowing assessment of the impact of
      immigration on the GDP per capita of the native population. For instance,
      the then Home Office minister with specific responsibility for migration,
      Liam Byrne MP, referred to the work [a] in the House of Commons in April
      2008 as "the one good report in this area" [8]. In his oral evidence to
      the House of Lords Economic Affairs Committee in June 2008, referred to an
      estimate, based on the report [d], that migration contributed 0.15% per
      annum to the GDP per capita of the native population [4], a number
      described as "small, but ... not insignificant".
    Impact on the media
      The research described in section 2 remains the primary analysis of the
      effects of immigration, both on wages and on public finances. As a result,
      it has played a central role in informing media coverage of this issue,
      particularly in the financial press. Examples may be found through the
      impact period, and the research in [c], particularly, saw renewed interest
      in 2012-13 in the run-up to allowing Bulgarians and Romanians into the UK
      labour market. Indicative examples of media coverage are:
    - the Independent described the net benefits of immigration (July
      2009) [9].
    - Petros Fassoulas in the New Statesman used the research to
      argue that immigration is a boon for society (January 2009) [10]; 24,910
      circulation.
    - Tim Harford in the Financial Times cited research as evidence
      of the net contribution A8 immigrants have made to the public purse (March
      2013) [11]; 393k daily print and web readers.
    - Brian Groom in the Financial Times cited the wages study as
      evidence of the negligible effects on wages (March 2013) [12]; 393k daily
      print and web readers.
    
ImpactSummary

    Research at UCL provided the primary analysis of the effects of
      immigration on wages and the fiscal costs and benefits of A8 migration to
      the UK. These provided important and ongoing contributions to policy and
      media debates in the UK, as demonstrated by citations in key debates and
      policy documents in both Houses of Parliament, in commissioned studies and
      in the financial press. As a result, research successfully put facts and
      figures on immigration into a highly emotional and partisan debate.
    
UnderpinningResearch

    Research on the effects of immigration on the UK economy conducted
      between 2007 and 2009 was led by Professor Christian Dustmann at the
      Centre for Research and Analysis of Migration (CReAM), at UCL. This work
      has focused on two strands: the effect of immigration on wages in the host
      country, and the fiscal consequences of immigration.
    In 2007, we were commissioned by the Low Pay Commission (LPC) to research
      the implications of immigration for the setting of the minimum wage in the
      UK. The resulting report [a] was written by Dustmann and Ian Preston (also
      Professor of Economics at UCL and CReAM) and Tommaso Frattini (then a PhD
      student). At the time, the debate on immigration, and the existing
      conceptual and empirical models focused either on the overall wage effects
      of migration or the effects on particular skill groups. However, for the
      LPC, what was of interest was how immigration affected native wages at
        the low end of the wage distribution, particularly the 5th
      percentile, where the minimum wage is more likely to be binding.
    We developed novel theory and conceptual work and a new empirical
      framework for the estimation of these effects, with several key
      innovations. The academic paper emerging from this research [b] was
      published in 2012. We found that over the period studied (1997-2005)
      immigration to the UK contributed positively to average wage growth of
      UK-born workers. However, while benefiting workers in the middle and upper
      part of the wage distribution, it put downward pressure on wages of
      workers at the bottom of the distribution. Over the period considered, our
      estimates suggested that immigration held wages back by 0.7p per hour at
      the 10th percentile but contributed about 1.5p per hour to wage growth at
      the median and slightly more than 2p per hour at the 90th percentile.
    As a response to an ongoing academic and public debate on the fiscal cost
      of A8 migration (i.e. from countries who joined the EU in 2004) to the UK,
      which was based on no factual evidence, Dustmann, Frattini and Caroline
      Halls (an MSc student and Research Assistant at CReAM) began research on
      this issue in 2009, which resulted in a paper published in Fiscal
        Studies in 2010 [c]. That same year, it became part of a research
      report for the Migration Advisory Committee (MAC) [d]. We found that:
    - A8 immigrants who arrived after EU enlargement in 2004, and who have at
      least one year of residence &#8212; and are therefore legally eligible to claim
      benefits &#8212; are about 60% less likely than natives to receive state
      benefits or tax credits, and to live in social housing.
    - Comparing the net fiscal contribution of A8 immigrants with that of
      individuals born in the UK, in each fiscal year since enlargement in 2004,
      A8 immigrants made a positive contribution to public finance.
    - In the latest fiscal year, 2008-09, A8 immigrants paid 37% more in
      direct or indirect taxes than was spent on public goods and services that
      they received. We also showed that on average, A8 workers have a better
      educational background than UK-born workers, but receive lower wages,
      especially in the period immediately after coming to the UK.
    