CaseStudyId: 41125
Title: 
    The benefits of Painting Analysis for conservation and our cultural
        heritage
    

ImpactDetails

    Libby Sheldon's research has had impact in three distinct areas. First,
      it has contributed to knowledge of the material and technical constituents
      of painting for specialist, but non-academic, professionals such as those
      involved in conservation [1, 3, 6], the art trade [9], and auction houses.
      Second, it has benefited national cultural heritage by establishing
      authenticity and attribution through the analysis of paint conditions of
      works in important public and private collections in the UK [3,9]. Third,
      it has been disseminated, often extremely widely, to a broad public and
      has advanced the public understanding of how paintings are made and how
      artists work [4, 5, 7]. Overall, it has enabled the re-evaluation of
      important works of art that form part of our world cultural heritage [1].
    Sheldon's collaboration with the National Portrait Gallery (NPG) has contributed
        to the deepening of this major national collection's understanding and
        interpretation of its holdings. Her findings were of critical
      importance to conservators and curators, both at the level of the
      specifics of paint sampling and larger research questions into the uses of
      technical evidence in art historical interpretation [1]. Impact on both
      specialist and large publics has been achieved through her contributions
      to Making Art in Tudor Britain (MATB), a five-year NPG project
      (2007-12) which included an exhibition and impressive website (in 2012-13
      the project pages on the website had 74,044 views [1] and NPG has on
      average 1.8m visitors per year [2]). Through the NPG exhibition and
      website, new developments within technical art history were brought to
      public attention, contributing a unique picture of the material life of
      paintings. Important ideas about works of art as physical objects made
      according to the material and technical constraints of a particular time
      and place have been disseminated widely, deepening public understanding of
      Tudor visual culture [1]. Sheldon has further strengthened this engagement
      through regular public lectures for the project's research forum series.
      Her technical and historical insights into the original appearance of
      artworks provided the general public with an improved understanding of the
      original purpose of the artist. An example was Sheldon's analysis of paint
      samples from Elizabeth I, Darnley portrait [d] where she identified
      discoloured blue and red pigments and showed that the orange raised
      patterning over the costume was originally purple. Such discoveries were
      used by the NPG to enable viewers to have a fuller sense of what the
      paintings would have looked like when painted: in this case of a richer,
      more colourful image of the Virgin Queen than we see today; the painting
      featured in the Changing Faces of Elizabeth I display [10]. The MATB
      project findings using Sheldon's research (e.g. comparing later copies
      after Holbein of William Warham and on the use of the rare pigment
      fluorite in two versions of portraits Sir Thomas Gresham) are on show in a
      series of displays such as `Double Take: Versions and copies of Tudor
      Portraits' in the Tudor Galleries at the NPG as well as at Montacute
      House, Somerset [1].
    Her research made a significant contribution to knowledge of Sir John
        Gilbert's experimental techniques benefiting specialist professionals
      in the Conservation Department at the Guildhall Art Gallery. The discovery
      that the artist used aqueous media for many of his large-scale works
      which, in past, were thought to be oil paintings, has led to a review of
      their increased vulnerability. This had important implications for their
      care and conservation, enabling preventive conservation strategies to be
      put in place, reducing rates of degradation, and helping to preserve them
      today. Working in collaboration with the Guildhall and the Hamilton Kerr
      Institute, Sheldon's key contribution was her analysis of his watercolours
      using microscopy together with non-destructive X-ray fluorescence
      analysis, including an experiment in fading. Her research into his
      painting techniques was widely disseminated as part of the exhibition (29
      Apr-29 Aug 2011) of Gilbert's work at this important public gallery,
      helping to reassess the importance of the artist as a far less
      conventional figure than had previously been thought. Her research
      directly fed into and contributed to the public display of the artist's
      work (in a display entitled `In the Studio') and so contributed to its
      programme of public engagement dedicated to promoting understanding of the
      materials and techniques of painting: thus a major part of the Guildhall
      display was devoted to a technical exploration of the way in which Gilbert
      worked, drawing on his own records and incorporating Sheldon's analysis of
      his gouaches and watercolours [6].
    Sheldon's research has enabled the critical re-evaluation of artworks
        to benefit our cultural heritage. In addition to changes in their
      economic value [10], her research directly contributed to changes in how
      specific paintings are publically and professionally perceived and valued.
      Building on her expertise in 17th-century painting techniques [8], she was
      able to show through cross- sectional analysis of Van Dyck's unfinished
      portrait of Queen Henrietta Maria as St Catherine (Private Collection)
      that it had been over-painted by a later artist (as shown in the display
      at the Banqueting House, 2012 [9]). Her paint sampling of a neglected,
      damaged and unattributed painting found in a storeroom of the Bowes
      Museum, County Durham yielded important findings: crystallographic
      analysis of pigments and paint additives placed it as from the early 17th
      century rather than the 19th century as previously thought. By
      contributing to the complex collaborative process of attribution, her
      research has helped to differentiate historic works from later copies or
      fakes. Her research was vital in the attribution of the Portrait of
        Olivia Boteler Porter to Van Dyck, rather than it being a work
      considered of no great importance. The discovery of the use of lead-tin
      yellow firmly dated it in the period and was characteristic of the
      artist's known techniques [3]. It is now considered one of the treasures
      of the Bowes Museum. Thus her work made a significant contribution to the
      artistic and cultural heritage of a key national collection; Van Dyck's
      painting is now displayed in the early picture gallery for the first time,
      with a large text panel that tells visitors the story of the research
      project and its discovery eliciting much visitor interest [3, 4, 9].
    The `detective work' that this entails has given the public a
        fascinating insight into the history of art and how paintings signify as
        well as how they are made as material artefacts. Sheldon's research
      reached large audiences e.g. through an appearance on a Culture Show
      special on the Bowes portrait partly filmed in Sheldon's UCL workshop and
      viewed by 1.49m people [4], as well as press coverage in the Guardian,
        Telegraph and the Daily Mail [5] which collectively reached
      a readership of over 10m. She has raised public awareness of the
      scientific research involved in distinguishing fakes and forgeries from
      originals, e.g. her appearance with Philip Mould and Bendor Grosvenor [9]
      on the BBC 1 programme `Fake or Fortune' discussing her analysis of Van
      Dyck's Portrait of Olivia Boteler Porter (also filmed in the
      department and based on analysis conducted before her retirement) in
      September 2012 (up to 4.8 million viewers; the 20th most watched programme
      that week, bringing technical art history to a vast public [7]).
    The work described above comprises a few representative examples of the
      wider impacts of Sheldon's research. During her time at UCL Sheldon was
      one of only two people practising easel painting analysis in the country
      and the only one doing so in the context of a university's art history
      department. Through specialist technical bulletins, talks and professional
      exchanges, her findings were communicated to professionals outside
      academia, e.g. through the conference `Tudor and Jacobean Painting:
      Production, Influences and Patronage' hosted by the NPG and the Courtauld
      Institute of Art (Dec 2010) and funded by the British Academy and The Paul
      Mellon Centre for Studies in British Art. Sheldon's research was
      instrumental in building partnerships with these and a variety of other
      non-academic specialists e.g. in 2011, she received sponsorship of &#163;30,000
      from a Dutch private collector to fund technical research on Cuyp and the
      Dordrecht School. Between 2008 and 2012, she advised a host of national
      and international bodies, as well as smaller institutions and private
      conservators. She received commissions from Europe, Australia, North
      America and Japan, and worked with a wide variety of UK institutions
      including the Holburne Museum, Dulwich Picture Gallery, Wallace
      Collection, National Trust, the art trade and commercial gallery sector
      (e.g. Philip Mould [9] and Rupert Maas Galleries). She has contributed to
      both specialist and public understanding of world cultural heritage e.g.
      by providing analyses of paintings undergoing conservation including by
      Van Dyck in the Royal Collection [8]. The prestigious institutions with
      which she has worked are an essential indicator of the respect with which
      Sheldon's research is held within the field.
    
ImpactSummary

    Research by Libby Sheldon into the history and technology of paints and
      pigments has benefited conservation specialists and art professionals
      based in both museums and the art trade. Using specialist scientific
      techniques to examine artists' paint materials, her research findings have
      made possible the accurate dating of Old Master and British paintings and
      have played a crucial role in their authentication and critical
      re-evaluation. Her analysis of works in important public as well as
      private collections has contributed to both professional and public
      understanding of our cultural heritage. Her research has enriched
      appreciation of technical art history for a large general audience through
      museum displays and programmes and through high-profile media appearances
      enhancing the understanding of how art is made from a technical and
      material perspective.
    
UnderpinningResearch

    Libby Sheldon is recognised as the leading paint analyst working in the
      UK and a pioneer of technical art history in this country, as director of
      the Painting Analysis Unit housed in UCL History of Art. In 2005 Sheldon
      made an important research breakthrough by establishing the authenticity
      of a painting by Vermeer in a private collection, previously thought to be
      a fake or a 19th-century pastiche [see a and b, co-written with UCL
      Chemistry, in section 3]. Applying Raman microscopy, a non-destructive
      technique relatively new to the heritage sector at the time, it was
      possible to map the presence of prized mineral pigments, such as lapis
      lazuli, and unusual paint combinations known to have been used by Vermeer,
      indicating clearly that the work was not in fact a forgery. Taking nine
      years, the research is a benchmark for the use of scientific means to
      investigate the authenticity of a painting. The techniques of paint
      sampling and pigment analysis Sheldon developed have led to insights into
      a wide range of paintings from the 14th-20th centuries [c-f]. We focus
      here on three key projects:
    1. Sheldon's long-standing research interest in Tudor, Jacobean
      and Elizabethan portraits underpins analyses of important works in the
      collection of the National Portrait Gallery (NPG) including a series of
      portraits after Hans Holbein the Younger [c]. Results from often-complex
      technical research, such as the discovery of a rare use of the highly
      prized and expensive purple pigment, fluorite, offer insights into the
      early 16th century pigment trade across Europe. Her analyses and
      interpretations of paint samples from specific works e.g. a Portrait
        of Baron Berners by an unknown Flemish artist c.1520-30 and a Portrait
        of Queen Elizabeth I by an unknown artist c. 1575 [d] enabled
      original paint palettes to be determined, highlighting the vulnerability
      of certain pigments to colour change with age. Examination of paint sample
      stratigraphy in cross-section and identification of the components by
      polarising light microscopy (PLM) and energy dispersive X-ray (EDX)
      enabled Sheldon to unearth evidence of lost or altered colours and
      textures. This not only has revealed the sophistication of Tudor and
      Jacobean painting techniques, but also opened up possibilities for new
      interpretations of the works [c, d].
    2. Working at the interface between art history and heritage
      science, Sheldon used scientific insights into the material structure of
      paint to develop new methodologies for analysis and interpretation of the
      technical history of paintings. Her close investigations and microscopic
      analyses of the little-known Victorian painter Sir John Gilbert shed new
      light on why this once famous and popular artist has fallen so
      dramatically into obscurity. Her analysis of his extraordinary uses of
      gouache and watercolour mediums on ten paintings at the Guildhall Art
      Gallery in 2009-10 demonstrated not only an adventurous use of new
      pigments &#8212; cerulean blue and zinc white, but also, significantly,
      Gilbert's use of aqueous media experimentally, as if it were oil, in
      unprecedented large-scale formats [e]. Commonly thought of as a
      conventional, even academic artist, Sheldon's research showed that Gilbert
      was highly experimental (and modern) in his painting practices.
    3. Combining traditional optical microscopy, an extensive
      knowledge of artistic practices and advanced instrumental analysis,
      Sheldon's research enabled the authentication and dating of painted works
      of art and facilitated a deeper understanding of artistic production
      methods, trade of mineral pigments, and robust identification of fakes and
      forgeries. Her exploration of the history and technology of pigments has
      led her to raise questions about artists' intentions and viewers'
      perceptual skills. For example, using microscopic techniques and comparing
      a large sample of Old Master paintings from the Making Art in Tudor
      Britain project, she investigated whether subtle 16th and 17th century
      combing and texturing techniques were deliberately practical strategies to
      manage the oil medium or aesthetic effects [f].
    Libby Sheldon was a Lecturer in Art History at UCL from 1978 until her
      retirement at the end of August 2012, and remains attached to the
      Department as an Honorary Senior Research Associate.
    