CaseStudyId: 41137
Title: 
    Adoption of Senceive's innovative remote condition monitoring
        solutions in the rail and construction industries
    

ImpactDetails

    In the years since its formation, Senceive Ltd has established itself as
      the preferred provider of wireless remote condition monitoring for
      geotechnical and railway projects in the UK, leading to significant commercial
        benefits for both Senceive and its customers. The company's Flatmesh
      product range &#8212; launched in May 2009 and based upon UCL-developed wireless
      mesh technology &#8212; provides a highly robust, reliable and easy-to-deploy
      asset monitoring solution. Flatmesh enables the owners of
        geotechnical, rail and construction infrastructure to accurately and
        efficiently monitor their highly valuable and often difficult to access
        assets and in a manner which is significantly more cost-effective
      compared to alternatives such as manual monitoring, wired solutions or
      emerging technologies such as fibre optics. The innovative nature of the
      Senceive monitoring solution has been widely recognised, with for example
      a high-profile Tunnelling product innovation award being secured in
      November 2012 [a].
    The impact of adopting the Senceive solution for monitoring projects is
      illustrated through a 2011 deployment at Bond Street underground station
      [b], which was undergoing a &#163;300m major redevelopment with the objective
      of increasing capacity, improving accessibility and creating an
      interchange with Crossrail. In the design phase of the project, a need was
      identified for grouting works to be undertaken in voids that had formed
      around the Jubilee Line tunnel linings in order to stabilise the tunnels
      prior to commencement of the station reconstruction works. Early in the
      project, it became clear that a highly flexible, safe and reliable system
      to monitor movement within existing tunnels during the grouting works was
      needed, given the risks to personnel and tunnelling infrastructure if
      attempts were made to pump significant amounts of excess grout into the
      voids. A solution was delivered which utilised Senceive's high-resolution
      wireless tilt meters mounted on tunnel lining segments using novel
      magnetic fixings, with individual rotational and linear equivalent
      movements being displayed on Senceive's Webmonitor software. Halcrow's
      Associate Director Tunnels said of the project: "There was simply no
      credible solution other than that developed with Senceive. The system
        made significant savings to the cost of the works, which would have
      been much more labour-intensive, time-consuming and slower if a
      mechanically fixed wired solution had been used" [c]. Tunnelling Journal
      estimates that the Senceive solution saved an estimated &#163;1 million
      compared to conventional techniques [d]. The Innovation Director at
      Costain, another partner on the project, said: "Remote monitoring is an
      important service we are providing to our customers. It reduces costs
      compared to traditional methods and allows our teams to remotely
        monitor assets safely during construction and through the life of
      the asset. Remote monitoring is all about providing intelligent solutions
      to our customers to enhance their business performance and reducing
        the cost of infrastructure delivery. We are pleased to be able to
      support Senceive to bring innovation to make our delivery more efficient"
      [c].
    More recent deployments include a major tunnel re-lining project in
      2012/13 on the Jubilee Line between Bond St and Baker St, where Senceive
      was retained directly by Tubelines due to the company's unique ability to
      satisfy the challenging project-monitoring requirements imposed by
      remedial works that needed to be undertaken efficiently during limited
      periods (i.e. evenings and selected weekends) when trains did not run. The
      problem that Senceive was assisting in resolving was covered by BBC News
      [e] and in respect of the Senceive solution, the Lead Tunnel Engineer at
      Tubelines said: "Flatmesh and its enhanced integrated communications hub
      is an innovative, unique and appropriate combination of leading-edge
      technologies, developed by Senceive and specifically adapted for
      tunnelling applications. It offers the opportunity for a "totally
      wire-free solution" from tunnel to surface for challenging short- and
      long-term engineering works for which there is no credible existing
        alternative" [f].
    In addition since 2012, Amey has used Senceive's solutions on an
      increasing number of sites to deliver a structural monitoring capability
      for their UK-wide Civil Examination Framework Agreement (CEFA) contract
      for Network Rail. [text removed for publication]. Finally, in July 2013,
      Senceive secured a major contract with Canary Wharf Contractors to provide
      an underground tunnel monitoring system on the Northern and Bakerloo
      Lines, as part of the Shell Centre re-development project taking place on
      London's South Bank. The significance of this contract was that Senceive's
        solution displaced competing monitoring approaches ranging from
      laser-based electronic theodolites (feasibility issues due to space
      constraints), fibre-optics (expensive and unproven) and wired solutions
      (expensive and inflexible) [h] and thus provided strong and timely
      evidence of the impacts that wireless monitoring can deliver to the
      geotechnical and railway industries.
    The overall commercial opportunity that Senceive is addressing in the
      rail and construction markets is of significant economic importance, with
      the Institute of Civil Engineers (ICE) estimating that the UK alone will
      spend around &#163;50 billion per annum until 2030 [i] to address historic
      underinvestment, deliver new projects such as HS2 and transition to a
      low-carbon economy. The utilisation of Senceive's wireless remote asset
      monitoring platform by supply chain partners such as Amey, Costain,
      Balfour Beatty Rail and Getec (part of the Keller Group) enables
        companies to secure significant competitive advantages when
      tendering for construction and maintenance contracts at home and overseas.
      More broadly, wireless sensor network technologies remain an area of
      significant commercial interest, with market research reports (e.g.
      IDTechEx [j]) predicting that the market for wireless sensor network
      solutions will grow from around $0.45 billion in 2011 to around $2 billion
      by 2021.
    Finally from an economic impact perspective, Senceive is a small
      but increasingly important contributor to the growth of the
      knowledge-based economy in London. The company has achieved its success
      after a relatively modest investment, having raised &#163;450,000 of seed
      investment together with grants from the London Development Agency &amp;
      Technology Strategy Board of &#163;220,000 during the REF impact period.
      Company turnover has risen consistently over the past three years, with
      the year to 31 July 2013 generating revenues in excess of &#163;600,000 (a
      four-fold increase on 2012), whilst from an employment perspective, the
      company currently employs eight graduate or higher level staff (2 in 2007)
      from offices located in Putney, London [h].
    
ImpactSummary

    UCL spinout company, Senceive Ltd, has established itself as an
      innovative provider of wireless enabled remote condition monitoring
      solutions. The company provides a robust, scalable, safe and highly
      cost-effective infrastructure monitoring capability for railway and
      construction industry applications, with customers including Amey,
      Costain, Network Rail and Tubelines. Recent deployments on projects such
      as Crossrail have been recognised by industry bodies as delivering
      significant product innovation and cost savings in excess of &#163;1 million
      compared to use of a wired monitoring solution.
    
UnderpinningResearch

    The research underpinning this impact case study was undertaken in the
      Department of Electronic and Electrical Engineering from 2003 to 2005 by
      Dr Lionel Sacks, a Lecturer in the Information and Communication Systems
      Group and Dr Matthew Britton, a post-doctoral research fellow in the same
      research group. It arose as part of a Department of Trade and Industry
      (DTI)-funded project entitled SECOAS (Self-Organising Collegiate Sensor
      Networks) in which UCL was a participant along with industrial partners BT
      Exact PLC, Intelisys Ltd and Plextek Ltd, and the Universities of Essex
      and East Anglia. The objectives of the project [1, 2] were to demonstrate
      how a distributed network of smart sensors could be configured through the
      development of decentralised algorithms, such that the resulting sensor
      network would automatically adapt to failures, upgrades and requirement
      changes. Importantly, practical validation of the resulting technology
      took place through a trial deployment at the Scroby Sands wind farm
      located off the Norfolk coast.
    UCL's significant contribution to the SECOAS project was the development
      of an Integration Service Layer (ISL), which consisted of a lightweight
      operating system and modules for interfacing between the sensors,
      communications layers and processing systems that reside on each wireless
      node. Figure 1 illustrates schematically the basic approach, where sensor
      components, supported by microcontroller-based devices, are networked and
      managed to form a system capable of performing remote asset monitoring. It
      used design rules inspired by biological automata or agents which interact
      with their neighbours via simple rules whilst also co-operating with a
      large number of individuals to perform complex global tasks; the basis of
      these concepts were presented at the premier sensor networks venue in 2005
      [3, 4]. This was crucial to the resulting mesh-network communications
      architecture being both highly robust to the changes in topology that
      could occur due to node failures, obstacles placed in radio paths and
      varying weather conditions, and extremely scalable. The use of distributed
      approaches to network management [2, 3] enabled each node in the
      mesh-network architecture to be truly self-organising and autonomous, and
      as a result, avoided installation complexities arising from the use of
      explicit routing nodes in wireless monitoring approaches based upon Zigbee
      (IEEE 802.15.4) communication protocols. By the conclusion of the project,
      the SECOAS project partners had demonstrated [5] that it was feasible to
      combine the UCL ISL with cheap off-the-shelf hardware and software
      components in order to provide a wireless-enabled asset-monitoring
      solution that had potential for use in environmental and industrial
      monitoring applications.
    The translational objectives of the DTI's Next Wave programme funding
      also resulted in a series of market assessment activities being undertaken
      as the project team sought to understand the commercial potential of the
      project's research outputs. These activities indicated that owners of
      rail, utility and industrial infrastructure were seeking to monitor the
      state of their assets in a more efficient and robust manner. For example,
      Sir Ian McAllister (then Chairman of Network Rail) cited that his
      organisation was investing tens of millions of pounds in `intelligent
      infrastructure' programmes, as they sought to deliver effective predictive
      maintenance programmes that would enable railway operators to be informed
      when problems with often ageing and remote assets were likely to occur,
      and thus enable better planning for future investment. Resulting benefits
      would include the ability to maintain high availability of transportation
      networks, a reduction in operational problems, delays and associated
      economic consequences, and also increased safety both for passengers and
      railway workers. Back in 2005, wireless-enabled remote condition
      monitoring technologies showed promise, but a limiting factor to adoption
      was that the solutions needed to be robust, scalable and cost-effective in
      line with expectations of users who were highly conscious of safety and
      reliability. With the early prototypes of the UCL technology satisfying
      such requirements, the decision was made to commercially exploit the UCL
      technology through the creation of a spinout company, Senceive Ltd, which
      was founded in November 2005. In January 2006, Dr Britton became a
      full-time employee of Senceive in order to assist in the translation of
      the UCL technology into a commercial product, whilst Dr Sacks provided
      consultancy support to the company post-incorporation.

Figure 1: The four layers of the UCL system: (i) sensor components, (ii) the software, operating
system and microcontroller unit (MCU); (iii) radio and network control and management system;
and (iv) the operational support system, administration, provision and maintenance. Layers (iii) and
(iv) together comprise an Integrated Service Layer (ISL).
	  
    