CaseStudyId: 41439
Title: 
    Provision of data on freshwater acidification and recovery for
        monitoring and policymaking
    

ImpactDetails

    UCL research into the effects of, and potential for, recovery from acid
      rain damage has influenced national pollution policy and habitat
      management, with a reach spanning local, national and international
      agencies. The AWMN is the key provider of information on surface water
      acidification to UK Government and Devolved Administrations. It is also
      the sole UK provider of data and expertise to the UNECE International
      Cooperative Programme on the Assessment and Monitoring Effects of Air
      Pollution on Rivers and Lakes (ICP Waters), set up under the UNECE
      Convention on Long-Range Transboundary Air Pollution (CLRTAP) [1]. Through
      the Freshwater Umbrella Programme, AWMN data are further used to develop
      and apply critical load models used on a national basis for the provision
      of data for freshwater ecosystems under the 1999 UNECE Gothenburg Protocol
      to Abate Acidification, Eutrophication and Ground-level Ozone. As well as
      providing original, high-quality data to guide decision-making by DEFRA,
      the data are a major resource for organisations responsible for the
      management of UK upland water catchments.
    Set national thresholds to identify the extent of acidification of
        surface waters: The UK National Focal Centre (NFC), based at the
      Centre for Ecology and Hydrology (CEH) (Bangor), has used UCL research for
      freshwater critical loads mapping and modelling since 1991. The NFC submit
      national critical loads data to the Coordination Centre for Effects (CCE)
      in response to their calls, usually every year [2]. These data are used in
      the integrated assessment of European air pollution agreements. In 2005,
      the freshwater critical loads dataset developed at UCL was expanded to
      include 38 new exceeded sites from the North Yorkshire Moors. In 2008,
      application of the FAB model to the expanded dataset was undertaken. This
      showed that 37% of freshwater sites were still exceeded with 2004-06
      deposition data, and that 25% of all sites will continue to exceed
      critical loads beyond 2020. These 2008 revised data for freshwaters
      contributed to the national critical loads dataset submitted to the NFC
      and were subsequently used to revise the Gothenburg Protocol, which was
      adopted by CLRTAP signatories 2012. Nitrogen deposition was shown by the
      UCL research to be responsible for a major part of continued exceedances.
    Model and measure recovery of freshwaters: Using data provided by
      UCL, the NFC also generates annual summary statistics of (i) catchment
      area and (ii) the percentage of 1,700 freshwater sites with critical load
      exceedances for England, Wales, Scotland and Northern Ireland and for the
      UK as a whole [2]. These data formed the basis of the critical load maps
      presented in the DEFRA 2012 Review of Transboundary Air Pollution report
      to evaluate the current state of rural air pollution issues in the UK
      (RoTAP 2012; pp. 132-135) [3]. The same data were used by DEFRA's Joint
      Nature Conservancy Council towards UK indicators with respect to
      international biodiversity targets [4].
    Set new acidification standards for pollution of UK rivers:
      Historically, pH standards for rivers were set using values that protect
      against extreme events. The full time-series of AWMN data produced at UCL
      highlighted a stronger relationship between mean pH and acid neutralising
      capacity and biological communities than there was for extreme-event
      minimum values [5]. In 2012, the UK Technical Advisory Group accepted
      these new acidity standards. This is beneficial because extreme events are
      rare and difficult to capture. Using the mean allows more robust
      relationships to be modelled between chemistry and biology. These new
      standards are now used to help classify the ecological status (e.g. High,
      Good, Moderate, Poor, Bad) of water bodies for WFD statutory reporting,
      and because the standards come from an improved science base, they reduce
      the discrepancies with observed biological status.
    Determination of ecological status of key UK protected habitats:
      The Habitats Directive is the cornerstone of Europe's nature conservation
      policy; the AWMN provides advice and data to Natural England, Scottish
      Natural Heritage (SNH) and Countryside Commission for Wales (CCW) to
      support their obligations under Article 17. UK conservation agencies use
      AWMN outputs in their on-going reporting on the condition of the EC
      Habitats Directive Annex 1 habitat type oligotrophic to mesotrophic
      standing waters with vegetation of the Littorelletea uniflorae
      and/or of the Iso&#235;to-Nanojuncetea (Habitat code H3130). For
      example, SNH established the `favourable conservation status' of the
      Merrick Kells, a Special Area of Conservation, using AWMN data from the
      Round Loch of Glenhead. In 2011 UCL was contracted by SNH to update the
      organisation on the recent acidification status of the Merrick Kells. The
      resulting report [6] showed that acidity had decreased over the past 20
      years because of UK pollution reduction strategies, but that post-2008 the
      area's critical load still failed to meet UNECE targets. SNH have since
      used these findings to report on the condition of the Merrick Kells and
      the wider habitat type for Europe to the Scottish Government.
    Guide upland forestry planting: The Forestry Commission relies
      heavily on the AWMN data to inform policy on managing forestry within
      acid-sensitive areas. For example, forest managers are required to
      undertake a catchment-based critical load assessment when new forests are
      planted, especially if the planted area exceeds 30% of the catchment [7,
      p. 4] [8, p. 30]. These assessments are compared to the acid deposition
      load received by the catchment (determined from UCL data provided to the
      NFC). Where a catchment-based assessment shows acid deposition exceeding
      the freshwater critical load, approval is unlikely to be granted for new
      planting or restocking above certain thresholds of forest cover until
      there are further reductions in pollutant emissions [7]. In 2011-2012,
      24,500 ha of new planting and restocking took place; where this exceeded
      30% of the catchment they were required to undergo the assessment [9].
      AWMN datasets underpin the critical load assessment mandated in the 2011
      guidelines, and are a key component of the draft guidelines under
      consultation in 2013.
    
ImpactSummary

    UCL research underpins Government requirements to monitor the
      effectiveness of its policies with respect to international legislation to
      combat the impact of acid deposition on surface waters. UCL led two
      programmes: the Acid Waters Monitoring Network and the Freshwater Umbrella
      programme. Since 2008 these programmes have been used to: (i) set national
      thresholds to identify the extent of acidification of surface waters; (ii)
      model and measure recovery of freshwaters from reductions in acid
      deposition; (iii) set new acidification standards for pollution of UK
      rivers; (iv) determine ecological status of key UK protected habitats; and
      (v) guide upland forestry planting.
    
UnderpinningResearch

    Acid Waters Monitoring Network: Acid rain has been a global
      concern since the 1970s. Freshwaters were increasingly polluted by the
      products of fossil fuel combustion, especially sulphur (S) and nitrogen
      (N) gases, leading to acidification of surface freshwaters and a decline
      in biodiversity. Acid rain, however, is a trans-boundary problem, which
      required international agreements to be set up through the United Nations
      Economic Commission for Europe (UNECE) to curb and ultimately reverse the
      damage caused by emissions of acid-forming compounds. Because of their
      world-leading research into the causes of surface water acidification, the
      Environmental Change Research Centre (ECRC; led by Battarbee) was selected
      by the UK Government to design and lead a programme to monitor freshwater
      ecosystem responses to policy-led reductions in sulphur and nitrogen
      emissions. The Acid Waters Monitoring Network (AWMN) was thus established
      in 1988, and since its inception, researchers at UCL Geography have
      managed the Network as well as utilising the long-term datasets for
      original research. Since 1988, stream water chemistry has been measured
      monthly and lake water chemistry quarterly by UCL. UCL also contributes
      the majority of the data gathered through annual programme surveys of fish
      (UCL and Marine Scotland), diatoms (Flower, UCL), plants (Shilland, UCL),
      and metals and spheroidal carbonaceous particles (Rose, UCL).
    UCL led the work on long-term hydrochemical trends in acid-sensitive
      waters to show that policy reductions in sulphur deposition have resulted
      in significant reductions in sulphur concentrations in surface waters,
      with concomitant increases in pH [a]. However, the research also revealed
      distinct spatial differences in the extent of recovery, caused by
      confounding factors such as organic acids and catchment afforestation [a].
      Unfortunately, the effects of reductions in nitrogen deposition were
      mixed, with nitrate concentrations still elevated in some Scottish sites
      [a]. UCL-led research into recovery from acidification has also thrown up
      surprises. In a landmark study, analyses of AWMN data showed that
      reductions in sulphur deposition were also responsible for rising trends
      in dissolved organic carbon in remote European freshwaters, further
      offsetting declines in surface water acidity [b].
    UCL have also played a key role in demonstrating that biological recovery
      has, at best, been only very modest, despite significant increases in pH.
      For example, diatoms show limited responses, but the recovered
      biodiversity is often different from pre-acidification states [c].
      Moreover, significant recovery in fish stocks was observed at only two of
      the most acidified sites, although new standards were developed to monitor
      the best indicators of acid impact in relation to freshwater fisheries
      [d].
    Development and improvement of critical load models: UCL Geography
      also led the Freshwater Umbrella programme, commissioned between 1990 and
      2011 by the Department for Environment, Food and Rural Affairs (DEFRA) to
      complement the AWMN. In particular, the programme provides the expert
      input and method development for freshwater critical load modelling using
      the First-order Acidity Balance [FAB] model, a model specifically modified
      for use in the UK by UCL (Curtis) [e]. The model is used to identify the
      extent of damage to surface waters caused by acid deposition, taking into
      account the separate and combined effect of sulphur and nitrogen. UCL-led
      research identified the threat of nitrogen deposition, by showing that
      almost all upland lakes in the UK exceed their UNECE-established critical
      loads for nitrogen [f], necessitating further reductions in nitrogen
      emissions [f].
    