CaseStudyId: 41445
Title: 
    Development of more effective technologies for oral delivery of drugs via
      improved understanding of the physiological features of the
      gastrointestinal tract
    

ImpactDetails

    Improved understanding of drug release and uptake has allowed development
      of three patent-protected technologies for improved drug delivery: PHLORALTM,
      for release of drugs in the colon, and DuoCoatTM and ProReleaseTM,
      formulations designed to allow transit through the stomach and immediate
      release upon gastric emptying.
    PHLORALTM arose as a result of earlier studies
      on a product trademarked as COLAL-PREDTM [8].
      COLAL-PREDTM was developed with over &#163;1m in research and
      licensing funding provided by Alizyme [a]. This technology
      progressed into phase III clinical trials for a product containing
      prednisolone metasulphobenzoate. The knowledge gained from this study led
      to the development of PHLORALTM which is the world's first dual
      trigger colonic coating technology. The coating exploits both the pH
      change and increase in bacterial numbers along the gastrointestinal tract,
      with each component acting as a failsafe to guarantee reliable and
      consistent targeted delivery [9]. The corresponding product, which
      contains mesalazine as the active therapeutic ingredient, is currently in
      phase III trials as a treatment for ulcerative colitis. It was the subject
      of a patent application in 2007, which has since been granted in many
      territories worldwide [b] and has been the subject of licenses,
      options and contracts. The coating allows precise and consistent release
      of material in the colon, and may be used for the treatment of localised
      as well as systemic diseases (PHLORALTM has been licensed for
      both purposes). In particular, a licence has been granted to Tillotts
      Pharma AG for treatment of ulcerative colitis using mesalazine, as the
      next generation of their current product AsacolTM, the
      market-leading product for treatment of ulcerative colitis with an annual
      global market in excess of $600m [c]. Ulcerative colitis, a form
      of inflammatory bowel disease, affects 120,000 people in the UK, and is
      conventionally treated with anti-inflammatory drugs, immunosuppressants
      and biological therapeutics. Without successful drug delivery, surgical
      removal of parts of the intestine can be the only remaining option, and
      25-40% of sufferers currently have all or part of their colon removed.
      This can also necessitate the use of stoma bags, which negatively impact
      quality of life. The PHLORALTM product has entered a phase III
      clinical trial which will report late in 2014 [d]. The project has
      to date generated &#163;0.75m in funding for research at the UCL School of
      Pharmacy and from licensing [e]. PHLORALTM has
      additionally been licensed to Oxford Pharmascience for the delivery of
      statins to the colon [f]. This has generated more than &#163;200,000 in
      research and licence revenue [e]. Their product (SafestatTM)
      is designed to reduce the amount of statin that needs to be administered
      to the patient, thereby increasing safety as well as reducing cost [g].
      The product is undergoing clinical development, with human trials expected
      late in 2013.
    ProReleaseTM is a microparticulate drug
      formulation designed to allow rapid transit through the acidic stomach
      environment, followed by immediate release at higher pH. Drugs
      incorporated into ProReleaseTM are released far more rapidly
      than standard drug formulations. A patent was filed covering this
      methodology in 2004 [h], and in 2009, the technology was licensed
      into a UK company, Kuecept Limited [i]. Kuecept was initially set
      up as a spin-out from the UCL School of Pharmacy in 2007, and currently
      has an annual turnover in excess of &#163;1m, having worked on over 600 client
      projects since incorporation [j]. The license, which is restricted
      to provision of services to third-party clients, has resulted in early
      development projects for a number of drugs and generated significant
      income to the UCL School of Pharmacy [e].
    DuoCoatTM is a multi-layer coating technology
      designed to rapidly dissolve in the upper small intestine. In 2007, a
      patent was filled in collaboration with Evonik industries [k]. The
      technology is offered for licensing through Evonik and Kuecept Limited and
      to date, positive proof-of-concept data has been generated with different
      actives [e].
    In summary, this family of products has had a significant impact on the
      development of formulations within the pharmaceutical industry, providing
      a clear route to much greater impact should the products be marketed for
      patient use. Companies have invested heavily in the development of
      products relating to these technologies and, in a competitive environment,
      have included these products in the development of their business
      strategies. We estimate that in total 15 pharmaceutical companies have
      accessed the technologies either through licensing, options or contracts
      to date.
    
ImpactSummary

    Research by Professor Abdul Basit's group at the UCL School of Pharmacy
      is leading to improved treatments for ulcerative colitis and other
      conditions through increased knowledge of the complex physiology of the
      gastrointestinal tract. Improved understanding of in vivo drug
      release and uptake has allowed development of three patent-protected
      technologies for improved drug delivery: PHLORALTM, for release
      of drugs in the colon, and DuoCoatTM and ProReleaseTM
      formulations designed to allow intact transit through the stomach followed
      by immediate release upon gastric emptying. These technologies are the
      subject of licences and ongoing development programmes, with PHLORALTM
        currently in phase III clinical trials. The impact is therefore
      the introduction of enabling technologies that have positively influenced
      the drug development programmes of pharmaceutical companies.
    
UnderpinningResearch

    The research, which underpins the innovations described below, centres on
      understanding the chemistry and physiology of the digestive tract in
      relation to delivery and uptake of drugs through the oral route, which is
      by far the most common means to introduce drugs into the body. Our group
      has made a major contribution to understanding the factors (and interplay
      between factors) that lead to product failure or sub-optimal therapeutic
      effects. For example, we have identified and studied numerous intestinal
      parameters that can influence drug behaviour in the gastrointestinal
      tract, including intestinal pH, fluid volumes and composition, intestinal
      transit times and microbiota. These characteristics can be highly variable
      between individuals and within the same individual tested on different
      days [1, 2, 3].
    Overall, therefore, our work on gut physiology in relation to drug
      delivery has provided a knowledge base that facilitates the performance
      understanding and hence improvement of pharmaceutical products. More
      specifically, our understanding of pertinent physiological issues has led
      to identification of transit features that may lead to product failure or
      sub-optimal performance. For example, we have shown that, contrary to
      accepted belief, the small intestinal transit time is affected by meal
      intake. Food consumption was shown to significantly shorten transit time
      from 200 minutes to 100 minutes [2]. This in itself facilitates
      the provision of patient advice for those medications where such transit
      behaviour may be critical. In addition, we have established that
      intestinal pH is subject to marked intra- and inter-subject variability [3].
      This in turn informs the development of pH-dependent drug delivery systems
      as we are now more aware of the range of gut conditions within the patient
      population.
    This knowledge has therefore enabled us to develop delivery approaches
      that optimise drug release, based on a more thorough understanding of how
      drugs transit through the gastrointestinal tract. The key research
      findings that relate to the development of our new technologies include:
    
      Improved understanding of the factors influencing residence time (and
        variations thereof) in the different compartments of the gut [1-3],
        in turn allowing us to develop delivery systems which exploit the
        respective time windows more effectively and realistically.
      Improved understanding of the pH environment of the stomach and small
        intestine [1-6], in turn allowing us to develop release systems
        that may be more effectively and efficiently triggered by changes in pH.
      Improved understanding of the nature and behaviour of the microbiota
        of the colon [1, 7-9], in turn allowing us to develop colonic
        delivery systems with more specific and effective triggers for release.
    
    For drugs that would otherwise be inactivated in the stomach, we have
      developed two novel enteric technologies that exit the stomach rapidly and
      thereafter release rapidly (ProReleaseTM and DuoCoatTM).
      ProReleaseTM, a microparticulate drug formulation, is designed
      to allow rapid transit through the stomach (via control of size) followed
      by immediate release at higher pH [4]. Drugs incorporated into
      ProReleaseTM are released much more rapidly in the intestine
      than standard drug formulations [4]. DuoCoatTM, a
      multiple-layer enteric coating technology, dissolves at a faster rate than
      industry-standard enteric coatings [5] due to our appreciation
      that the pH is lower in the proximal intestine than is commonly believed.
      In a clinical study, the mean release time of the DuoCoatTM
      technology, post gastric-emptying, was 28 minutes. This compared
      favourably with a mean time of 66 minutes for the conventional enteric
      coatings [6].
    Enteric-coated products are also used to deliver drugs to the large
      intestine or colon for the treatment of diseases including ulcerative
      colitis. However, in our studies, such coated tablets or pellets often
      fail to release in the colon, either failing to disintegrate at all or
      prematurely releasing their drug load [3, 7]. Further, it was
      shown that contrary to accepted opinion, intestinal pH alone was a poor
      indicator of successful tablet disintegration, with intestinal residence
      times and fluid volumes also playing key roles [3]. Observed
      variability in drug release using conventional carriers has led the group
      to develop new technologies with more reliable release characteristics.
      For example, research into alternative means to achieve colonic release of
      drugs led to recognition of the role of bacteria in degrading starch
      coatings and therefore enabling release in the colon [7, 8]. Our
      group identified this process, whereby the incorporation of starch into
      traditional film coatings leads to its degradation exclusively by colonic
      bacteria. This led to the development of PHLORALTM, a
      dual-trigger colonic delivery system, which exploits both the pH change
      and increase in bacterial numbers along the gastrointestinal tract, with
      each component acting as a failsafe to guarantee reliable and consistent
      targeted delivery [9]. Overall, therefore, our fundamental work on
      the effects of physiology on drug transport has led to findings which
      allowed us to rationally design new delivery approaches, the impact of
      which is described below.
    