CaseStudyId: 41440
Title: 
    Improving end-of-life care
    

ImpactDetails

    End-of-life care is of increasing importance for health and social care
      providers as well as patients, families and society. Death is a universal
      outcome, but more people are living to older ages with a range of advanced
      progressive conditions including cancer. Providing appropriate, evidence-
      based, high-quality care through deterioration and in death is a major
      challenge. Our work has provided the first firm evidence base in this
      area, which has widely informed policy and guidelines, and we have begun
      to work on specific interventions to improve end-of-life-care.
      High-quality end- of-life care for all has long-term impact on the
      experiences of carers and families into bereavement. Improved bereavement
      outcomes impact on health and costs to society.
    Informing policy on dementia: Our work on dementia has had a wide
      influence on national policy. It was heavily referenced in the Alzheimer's
      Society report My life until the end: Dying well with dementia
      (2012) [a]. Our interventional studies informed recommendations
      for the UK NICE-SCIE Guideline on Supporting People with Dementia and
        their Carers (2006) [b] and Living Well with Dementia: A
        National Dementia Strategy (2009) [c]. Epidemiological data
      from our acute hospital studies (including output [3]) has been used as
      evidence in the NHS Confederation's report Acute awareness: Improving
        hospital care for people with dementia [d] and the
      Alzheimer's Society's report Counting the Cost: Caring for people with
        dementia on hospital wards (2009) [e]. In 2009 we worked
      with Marie Curie Cancer Care on an assessment of end-of-life care for
      people with dementia in the London Borough of Haringey. This found that
      found that with timely support in the community, it would be possible to
      prevent some crises occurring, or in the event of the crisis happening,
      provide an intervention that would reduce the need for a hospital
      admission [f]. This was used as a best practice example in the
      2010 NICE Guidance: End of life care for people with dementia:
        Commissioning guide [g].
    Influencing NICE guidelines 2011: Evidence from our research was
      incorporated into NICE guidance in 2011 in 3 areas: spirituality,
      psychological assessment, and advance care planning.
    Spirituality: Our work is referenced in the NICE quality standard
      on End of life care for adults (QS13) supporting documents under
      Statement 6 &#8212; Holistic support &#8212; spiritual and religious [h]. It
      was also used in 2009 in the Department of Health National End of Life
      Care Programme publication Draft Spiritual Support and Bereavement
        Care Quality Markers and Measures for End of Life Care [i].
    Assessment of psychological needs: The distress thermometer is now
      recommended as part of holistic assessment of patients not only in
      palliative care but earlier in illness, in the National Holistic Common
      Assessment that forms part of the NICE quality standards for end-of-life
      care published in 2011 [j]. This simple tool is now widely used in
      UK clinical practice as part of holistic assessment of patients not only
      in palliative care but also earlier in illness [k].
    Advance care planning: Advance care planning for all with advanced
      illness is a key recommendation of the Department of Health End of
        Life Strategy 2008 and also of service initiatives such as the Gold
      Standards Framework; this is being extended to care for children and young
      people [l]. Our work provides empirical research evidence to
      inform policy development. Output [8], above, is cited in the Royal
      College of Physicians' 2009 Advance Care Planning: National Guideline:
        Concise Guide to Good Practice 12 [m] and Capacity, care
        planning and advance care planning in life limiting illness: A guide for
        health and social care staff published by DH National End of Life
      Care Programme in 2011 [n]. The relevant parts of these, are in
      turn referenced in the 2011 NICE quality standards for end-of-life care [o].
    Improving end-of-life care services
    We collated evidence on the importance of palliative care in heart
      failure (output [9]), which has formed the basis of Caring Together, a &#163;5
      million investment by Marie Curie Cancer Care and the British Heart
      Foundation to improve end-of-life care in heart failure [p].
      Between June 2011 and June 2013, 232 heart failure patients were referred
      to Caring Together across its three pilot sites. All these patients and
      their carers have benefited from the implementation of the core components
      of Caring Together, including the comprehensive assessment of needs. Very
      few patients required referral to specialist palliative care or hospice
      inpatient stays. Many of them benefited from referral to hospice day
      therapies at the three hospices in the pilot sites [q].
    Work with St Mungo's charity led to an influential report in May 2011 (Supporting
        homeless people with advanced liver disease approaching the end of life)
      on end-of-life experiences of homeless people facing death from advanced
      liver disease. As a result of this report, St Mungo's developed and
      implemented a palliative care education programme for extension to other
      homeless services; a resource pack was published in February 2013 [r].
    
ImpactSummary

    UCL research into end-of-life care has informed policy on palliative care
      for dementia patients and influenced NICE quality standards for
      end-of-life care in three areas: spirituality, psychological assessment,
      and advance care planning. The research has also been used by the charity
      St Mungo's to develop educational resources for services working with
      homeless people with advanced liver disease. Evidence collated by UCL on
      the importance of palliative care in heart failure has formed the basis of
      Caring Together, a &#163;5m investment by Marie Curie Cancer Care and the
      British Heart Foundation to improve end-of-life care in heart failure. A
      review of the effectiveness of hospice care is being used to support
      commissioning bids for end-of-life care services.
    
UnderpinningResearch

    The Marie Curie Palliative Care Research Unit (MCPCRU) is a
      multi-disciplinary research group that collaborates widely within and
      outside UCL. Since 2004, the group has developed and tested complex
      interventions to improve palliative and end-of-life care, using rigorous
      mixed methods, and collected data directly from patients and carers to
      inform intervention content and assess effectiveness in randomised
      controlled trials.
    An early systematic review in palliative care, published in 2005, found
      that further systematic research was urgently needed to inform an
      important and developing area of clinical practice, as the only papers
      meeting the full criteria for inclusion in the review found equivocal
      evidence of the efficacy for a palliative model of care in dementia [1].
      This paper has been highlighted by the Cochrane Collaboration as of
      particular importance.
    In 2006, we demonstrated through retrospective case note analysis the
      poor quality of end-of-life care provided to people with dementia in UK
      acute general hospitals [2] and then through a large MRC funded
      cohort study how 25% of people with moderate/severe dementia will die
      during their unplanned medical admission [3]. This was extended in
      2011 with a study into the consequences of behavioural and psychological
      disorders (BPSD) and pain, during an acute hospital admission, in people
      with dementia. This explored two specific areas: how BPSD affect outcomes
      for the person with dementia, informal carers and the hospital, and the
      detection and management of pain in people with dementia [4].
      Results of this study have been disseminated through seminars held with
      the Alzheimer's Society.
    Another long-running strand of research has determined whether spiritual
      beliefs may affect outcome of bereavement [5]; development of a
      standardised measurement for spiritual belief; and spiritual and religious
      interventions for the wellbeing of adults in the terminal phase of
      disease. Recognising also the importance of measurable psychological
      assessment in cancer care, our team led work in 2008-09 to validate the
      National Comprehensive Cancer Network Distress Thermometer. This tool was
      originally developed in the US, but we tested it and adapted it for use in
      a UK population [6]. In addition, the group has conducted a number
      of studies to investigate the acceptability, timing and content of
      advanced care planning discussions with cancer patients [7].
    In 2011, further work investigated the palliative needs of heart disease
      patients. This identified three themes that were consistently reported by
      both patients and health professionals: a lack of continuity in the care
      provided to advanced heart failure patients, poor communication, and
      inconsistency in changing the emphasis of care from life prolonging to
      supportive [8].
    