CaseStudyId: 41457
Title: 
    International Carotid Stenting Study influences national and
      international guidelines on the prevention of stroke resulting from
      carotid artery narrowing.
    

ImpactDetails

    The results of ICSS and the pooled meta-analysis, including data from
      ICSS, have been incorporated into National Institute for Health and
      Clinical Excellence (NICE), European, Australasian and North American
      guidelines on the treatment of carotid stenosis. They have also influenced
      public debate and clinical practice.
    1. Changes to UK Guidelines: In 2006, the National
      Institute of Health and Clinical Excellence IPG 191 on Carotid artery
      stent placement for carotid stenosis, which stated "Long-term efficacy
        in terms of prevention of stroke and restenosis is unknown" and
      encouraged clinicians "to enter symptomatic patients into the ongoing
        International Carotid Stenting Study". In 2011, NICE updated this
      guidance (IPG389) stating "Current evidence on the safety and efficacy
        of carotid artery stent placement for symptomatic extracranial carotid
        stenosis is adequate to support the use of this procedure provided that
        normal arrangements are in place for clinical governance and audit or
        research", quoting the published results of ICSS and our
      meta-analysis in support of the conclusions [a].
    In 2008, the 3rd edition of the National Clinical Guidelines
      for Stroke, published by the Royal College of Physicians stated "Carotid
        angioplasty or stenting should only be carried out in specialist centres
        where outcomes of these techniques are routinely audited and preferably
        as part of a randomised clinical trial." In the 4th
      edition published in 2012, this changed to read "Carotid endarterectomy
        should be the treatment of choice for patients with symptomatic carotid
        stenosis, particularly those who are 70 years of age and over. Carotid
        angioplasty and stenting should be considered in patients meeting the
        criteria for carotid endarterectomy but are considered unsuitable for
        open surgery", quoting the results of ICSS [b].
    2. Changes to European Guidelines: The Karolinska Stroke
      Consensus meetings form the platform for revision of the European Stroke
      Organisation (ESO) Guidelines. In 2008, the consensus statement concerning
      carotid endarterectomy vs. angioplasty read: "Until the results of the
        on-going trials are available for a pooled analysis of safety and
        long-term effectiveness, stenting should not be routinely offered to
        patients suitable for carotid endarterectomy." In 2010, these were
      changed to read "CEA is safer than CAS and remains the treatment of
        choice for patients with symptomatic severe carotid stenosis who are fit
        for surgery. CAS is an acceptable option for initial therapy for
        patients younger than 65-70 years with significant symptomatic carotid
        stenosis in centres with a peri-procedural stroke or death rate similar
        to that recommended for CEA", quoting the results of ICCS and our
      meta-analysis [c].
    3. Changes to Australasian Guidelines: In 2011, the
      Australasian Carotid Stenting Guidelines Committee updated its guidelines
      stating "CAS should not be performed in the majority of patients
        requiring carotid revascularization. CAS may be considered for specific
        high risk patients" citing ICSS, the ICSS-MRI sub-study and our
      meta-analysis [d].
    4. Changes to North American guidelines: In 2011,
      the Society of Vascular Surgeons in North American updated its guidelines
      for management of extracranial carotid disease, stating "CAS should be
        reserved for symptomatic patients with stenosis of 50% to 99% at high
        risk for CEA for anatomic or medical reasons", citing the results of
      ICSS [e].
    5. Impact on public policy debates: There has been
      concern expressed in public debates about the uncontrolled expansion of
      carotid stenting as an alternative to carotid endarterectomy in the face
      of the trial evidence. Several recent commentaries and leading articles in
      prominent medical journals have cited our work [f-i]. For example,
      a commentary in the Lancet by a leading expert neurologist entitled "Carotid
        stenting: more risky than endarterectomy and often no better than
        medical treatment alone" stated "This excess risk of stroke is
        highlighted again in each of the three latest reports: the International
        Carotid Stenting Study (ICSS), the ICSS imaging substudy, and the
        Carotid Revascularization Endarterectomy versus Stent Trial (CREST)"
      [i].
    6. Impact on clinical practice: Individual units have
      reported a fall in the number of patients treated by carotid stenting
      after the results of ICSS were published in keeping with the data having a
      direct impact on the practice of carotid revascularisation [j].
      Within the English NHS, the numbers of patients treated by CAS did not
      increase between 2006 and 2012, whereas the numbers of patients treated by
      CEA increased by 30%, a finding consistent with a response to the findings
      of our trials indicating that CEA was safer than CAS [k].
    7. Impact on patients: The training, proctoring and
      supervision in CAS that we introduced as part of the CAVATAS and ICSS
      trial protocols ensured that patients treated by CAS have the procedure
      performed as safely as possible. The perioperative risk of stroke or death
      from CAS fell by 30% from 2001 to 2010 during the course of CAVATAS and
      ICSS. As a result of our research, patients can now be accurately informed
      about the current risks of CAS versus CEA, and together with their doctor
      can make informed choices about which treatment is the most suited to
      them, resulting in better choice for patients, increased safety and
      improved long-term outcomes.
    
ImpactSummary

    Narrowing of one of the carotid arteries in the neck (carotid stenosis)
      is an important cause of stroke, a major public health problem. The
      results of an international multicentre randomised clinical trial,
      organised and led by Professor Martin Brown at the UCL Institute of
      Neurology, have been incorporated into national and international
      guidelines on the treatment of carotid stenosis. The trial evaluated
      carotid artery stenting (CAS), a new treatment to prevent stroke from
      carotid stenosis, in comparison to the standard treatment, carotid
      endarterectomy (CEA) (carotid surgery). The number of patients treated by
      CAS in England did not increase between 2006 and 2012, whereas the numbers
      of patients treated by CEA increased by 30%, a finding consistent with a
      response to the findings of our trials indicating that CEA was safer than
      CAS.
    
UnderpinningResearch

    A 20-year programme of clinical trial research, led by Professor Martin
      Brown, involved the introduction and evaluation of carotid stenting as a
      treatment to prevent stroke in patients with carotid artery narrowing
      (stenosis).
    Our first international multicentre trial, the Carotid and Vertebral
      Artery Transluminal Angioplasty Study (CAVATAS) recruited 504 patients
      between 1992 and 1997 and followed them for up to 11 years. The trial
      established the feasibility of carotid angioplasty and stenting, but the
      results were not definitive [1, 2].
    We therefore established a study to produce definitive data concerning
      the risks and benefits of carotid stenting in comparison to carotid
      endarterectomy (surgery), known as the International Carotid Stenting
      Study (ICSS). This was a large multi-centre randomised clinical trial and
      involved close collaboration with key experts in neurology, vascular
      surgery and statistics at academic centres including UCL, the London
      School of Hygiene and Tropical Medicine, University Medical Centre
      Utrecht, Sheffield Vascular Institute, Newcastle University, Basel
      University, Erasmus Medical Center Rotterdam, University of Manchester,
      University of Amsterdam, Leeds University, St George's Hospital Medical
      School, and Edinburgh University. ICSS included 1,713 patients with recent
      stroke or transient ischaemic attack caused by carotid stenosis, recruited
      from 50 centres in Europe, Canada, Australia and New Zealand. Half the
      patients were randomly assigned to treatment by stenting, and half to
      surgery. The study was supported by grants from the Medical Research
      Council, The NIHR-MRC EME Board, the European Union and The Stroke
      Association. The trial recruited between 2001 and 2008 and followed the
      patients for up to 10 years until 2011. The interim results were published
      in the Lancet in 2010 and the long-term results were presented to the
      European Stroke Conference in 2012 [3, 4]. The trial showed that
      stenting avoids the problems associated with an incision in the neck (e.g.
      cranial nerve injury), but caused more minor strokes than surgery during
      the insertion of the stent [3]. The long-term risk of disabling
      stroke or death was similar after the two treatments [4].
    A sub-study of ICSS led by Professor Brown and Dr Leo Bonati (UCL and
      Basel University) in 2010 demonstrated that stenting caused many more
      small ischaemic lesions in the brain on MRI than endarterectomy [5].
    Professor Brown also led a collaboration funded by the Stroke Association
      with the Chief Investigators from two other smaller European based trials
      of carotid stenting (Prof W Hacke from Heidelberg University and Prof JL
      Mas from Paris Descartes University) to establish the Carotid Stenting
      Trialists Collaboration in 2009. A meta-analysis of individual patient
      data from the three trials published in 2010 established that it was older
      patients in whom the risk of stenting was increased, while in younger
      patients the risks of stenting and endarterectomy were similar [6].
    A collaboration between Professor Brown and Dr R Featherstone from the
      UCL Institute of Neurology with Dr Bonati and Dr P Lyrer at Basel
      University led to a systematic review and extraction of new data from all
      the existing trials of carotid stenting being published in the Cochrane
      Database in 2012 [7]. This meta-analysis confirmed that stenting
      is associated with an increased risk of peri-procedural stroke or death
      compared with endarterectomy, but the excess risk is limited to older
      patients.
    