CaseStudyId: 41453
Title: 
    Development of the spin-out company PolyTherics, a major provider of
      conjugate therapy and protein modification technology to the
      pharmaceutical and biotechnology industries.
    

ImpactDetails

    Polytherics was founded in 2001 with funding from the Wellcome Trust
      Catalyst Biomedica, the Bloomsbury Bioseed Fund (of which the School was a
      shareholder) and Imperial Innovations [a]. PolyTherics moved in
      2006 to the London Biotechnology Innovation Centre. The company currently
      employs about 80 staff at three sites: London, Cambridge (following
      acquisition of Antitope) and Coventry (following acquisition of Warwick
      Effect Polymers). It manages a patent portfolio of over 100 granted and
      pending patents. Annual revenue has grown to over &#163;8m for the combined
      businesses for the 2013 calendar year. Brocchini is now a consultant to
      the company, having stepped down from the board to address new projects
      and commitments, but remains very closely aligned to the development of
      the patent and licencing portfolio.
    The impact of the company has been on the pharmaceutical and biotech
      industries as a result of the development of technologies which overcome
      significant technical and clinical challenges that are needed to develop
      new biopharmaceutical medicines. It is also worth noting that Brocchini is
      a key member of the EPSRC Centre for Innovative Engineering in
      Macromolecular Therapies, based at UCL which was set up to provide
      practical solutions to the issues associated with the commercial
      production of macromolecular medicines such as conjugate therapies. The
      impact of Polytherics has been derived through the new technologies based
      on academic research (e.g. TheraPEG&#8482;, CyPEG, HiPEG, ThioBridge) [b].
      These technologies have additionally been combined with those obtained
      through the purchases of Warwick Effect Polymers in 2012 [c] and
      Antitope in 2013 [d].
    The net effect is an innovative and growing company that is demonstrating
      significant impact via the licensing of new technologies to the
      pharmaceutical industry. This is corroborated by the development of
      associated products into clinical trials. While exemplar projects are
      specified here, PolyTherics and its affiliate companies have collaborative
      agreements and/or relationships with approximately 40 pharmaceutical and
      biotech companies. The conjugation technologies are being used
      commercially to (i) increase protein circulation half-life (TheraPEG&#8482;,
      CyPEG&#8482;, HiPEG&#8482;), (ii) develop ADCs (ThioBridge&#8482;) and other protein-drug
      conjugates and (iii) to develop new product formats (e.g. bispecific
      antibodies). Other technologies within the subsidiary company Antitope are
      focused on protein de-immunisation and protein engineering which is being
      used to produce better conjugates and modified protein-therapeutics. These
      technologies are being merged to provide new platforms to innovate in the
      development of new biopharmaceuticals.
    Examples are given here of projects whereby the PolyTherics' TheraPEG&#8482;
      technology is being used to develop products with partner companies,
      inevitably representing considerable investment by those organisations.
      Programs in development utilising TheraPEG technology include:
    
      Licence agreement for a long-acting interferon &#946; for the treatment
        of relapsing-remitting multiple sclerosis with Nuron Biotech Inc (US),
        with a view to reducing dosing frequency for interferon &#946;-1b products
        from every two days to potentially fortnightly injections [e].
      Licence agreement with Celtic Pharma Holdings for long-acting forms of
        blood-clotting factors VIIA, VIII and IX for the treatment of
        haemophilia A &amp; B. These products have the potential to be
        administered via subcutaneous rather than intravenous injection, thus
        providing a viable option for self-administered prophylactic therapy [f].
		
        In addition, the ThioBridge antibody-drug conjugate technology is being
        developed in a research collaboration with several partners including
        the following:
		[text removed for publication]
		
      Spirogen (another UCL spin-out company) and Polytherics are
        collaborating to conjugate Spirogen's pyrrolobenzodiazepine (PBD)
        cytotoxic agents to antibodies and antibody fragments [g].
      PolyTherics is working with Biotecnol to attach cytotoxic payloads to
        Tribodies (multi-specific antibody products generated via
        heterodimerisation of Fab fragments) for the development of targeted
        cancer therapies [h].
    
    With the successful development of the TheraPEG&#8482;, HiPEG&#8482;, CyPEG&#8482; and
      ThioBridge&#8482; technologies and their commercialisation, PolyTherics is now
      leveraging this success by integrating other services and technologies
      into its offering. PolyTherics position as a leading UK life sciences
      company has been pursued through the acquisition of University of Warwick
      spin-out company [c], Warwick Effect Polymers (where Brocchini's
      expertise with polymer technologies has enabled the further development
      and utilisation of their technologies) and in July 2013 the acquisition of
      Antitope [d], the leading provider in the field of assessment of
      immunogenicity potential for protein and antibody therapeutics and protein
      re-engineering in an agreement that was secured with further investment of
      &#163;13.5m, with a substantial investment from Invesco.
    Polytherics continues to benefit from the close connections with UCL
      School of Pharmacy and the venture capital arm of Imperial Innovations.
      The company now has a valuation of [text removed for publication], a clear
      indication that it is a major provider of expertise and technology
      relating to conjugate therapies and protein modification approaches to the
      pharmaceutical and biotechnology industries.
    
ImpactSummary

    Protein modification represents a highly significant and growing source
      of new products for the biopharmaceuticals market. This case study
      outlines the development of PolyTherics, a highly successful spin-out
      company from the UCL School of Pharmacy, and the impact that their
      enabling technology has had on the pharmaceutical and biotechnology
      industries. The company was developed as a direct result of new conjugate
      technology developed by Professor Steve Brocchini and coworkers at the
      School. The company moved to independent premises in 2006 and now manages
      a portfolio of over 100 granted and pending patents. Several licensing
      agreements are in place, including with Celtic Pharma Holdings for
      haemophilia treatments and Nuron for a multiple sclerosis treatment based
      on PEGylation conjugation technology. Revenue is expected to be &#163;8m in
      2013. The impact of Polytherics is therefore as a significant and
      effective technology provider to the pharmaceutical and biotechnology
      industries.
    
UnderpinningResearch

    Conjugate technology is an approach to medicines development whereby a
      bioactive molecule (typically a protein such as a cytokine, an antibody or
      a low molecular weight drug) is synthetically altered so as to incorporate
      a second molecule (typically a polymer such as poly(ethylene glycol)
      (PEG)) which significantly improves the pharmacokinetics or stability of
      the bioactive agent. Initial research in this area at the School of
      Pharmacy formed the basis of spin-out company Polytherics, with further
      underpinning research and the development of the patent portfolio
      continuing in close collaboration between Polytherics and the School over
      the following years, in parallel with the development of the company.
    PolyTherics was founded in 2001 by Steve Brocchini from the School of
      Pharmacy and Sunil Shaunak, a clinician then based at the Hammersmith
      Hospital and who is currently Professor of Infectious Diseases at Imperial
      College London. Anthony Godwin, who was a PhD student supervised by
      Brocchini at the School of Pharmacy, was also a co-founder and remains
      with the company as VP of Chemistry. The contribution of the School lay in
      the management of IP and the development of the conjugation, synthetic,
      purification, characterisation and modelling technologies, with the animal
      testing and in vitro work being conducted at the aforementioned
      partner institutions. Initially, the research strategy was based on a
      portfolio of work derived from the development of polyvalent medicines [1],
      although this aspect of the portfolio is now being developed by a separate
      spin-out company. In brief, this work examined systems such as anionic
      dendrimers (hyperbranched macromolecules that can be chemically
      synthesised to have precise structural characteristics). Water-soluble
      conjugates of these molecules with D(+)-glucosamine and D(+)-glucosamine
      6-sulfate were found to have significant immunomodulatory and
      anti-angiogenic properties respectively, with highly encouraging results
      found for the prevention of scar tissue formation after glaucoma surgery
      using a rabbit model.
    However, around this time the group also identified a significant
      limitation within the protein conjugate therapy field, namely the need to
      site-specifically modify proteins efficiently to provide homogeneous
      products. Prior to their initial work, it was necessary to re-engineer
      most proteins to have a free cysteine thiol to achieve site-selective
      modification. This is usually not scalable because during production a
      protein will misfold and/or aggregate, hence the re-engineering process
      would render the system unusable as a clinically viable product. The team
      hypothesised that if it were possible to exploit the innate reactivity of
      the two cysteine thiols in a disulphide bond (which would be already
      present within the protein) then such proteins could be site-specifically
      conjugated with the added benefit of increased stability. If achievable,
      then such a solution would effectively remove a key barrier to
      commercialise many classes of protein-based therapeutics.
    A grant from the BBSRC was obtained in 2004/5 and the associated work was
      published in 2006 [2]. One key insight of this research was that
      most therapeutic proteins do indeed have accessible disulphides and that
      the two cysteine thiols from a native disulphide could be used to achieve
      site- specific conjugation, while maintaining the biological activity of
      the protein. It was nevertheless surprising that a disulphide in a
      therapeutic protein such as a cytokine could be modified and the protein
      still remain active. The views of most experts at the time were that
      proteins would be expected to lose activity when their cysteine disulphide
      bonds had been altered in any way. This was therefore a ground-breaking
      insight and led directly to the patented TheraPEG&#8482; technology [3]
      which enables the disulphide bond approach to be used to attach PEG
      molecules via a three carbon bridge reagent. Although initial work was
      focused on the development of "C-3" bridging technologies, a "C-1"
      re-bridging technology has also been developed, thereby extending the
      range of opportunity for conjugation [4].
    Since this initial work, numerous significant advances have been made and
      published. In particular, PolyTherics developed new site-specific reagents
      such as CyPEG&#8482;[5], which allow selective binding to thiols on a
      free cysteine for proteins which have stable folds such as fibronectins.
      Recent work has led to the development of the HiPEG&#8482; technology to allow
      conjugation to two histidines close together [6]. This new HiPEG&#8482;
      technology is `site-selective' rather than just `site-specific' as it
      allows the conjugation site to be engineered at an optimal position on the
      protein. Histidines are easier to engineer into proteins than non-native
      amino acids, which have been the best way to achieve site-selective
      conjugation. Histidines are also easier than cysteines to engineer into
      proteins that already have existing native disulphide bonds. In parallel,
      the team has ensure the technology was described in detail to the academic
      community [7] and they developed a computational approach whereby
      public protein databases and molecular modelling programs may be used to
      select a protein rationally and to identify the optimum disulphide bond
      for experimental studies. This approach allows identification of
      accessible disulphide bridges in merely two hours, which can be of
      significant use for more complex proteins with multiple disulfide bonds [8].
    The company was therefore founded on the development of novel conjugation
      technologies and continues to innovate based on these early approaches.
      Much of PolyTherics' ongoing commercial activity is underpinned by the
      PEGylation (e.g. TheraPEG&#8482;) technologies outlined here to optimise protein
      pharmacokinetics and recently developed reagents (ThioBridge&#8482;) now being
      used to develop antibody drug conjugates (ADCs).
    