CaseStudyId: 41462
Title: 
    Using attachment research to improve the lives of vulnerable young
      children
    

ImpactDetails

    Attachment-based clinical interventions
    We have translated our research findings into major new clinical
      programmes with direct impact on the lives of children and families. For
      example, our Parent-Infant Psychotherapy programme (PIP),
      developed at the AFC, supports parents in understanding and responding
      sensitively to their baby's needs, thereby promoting the development of
      secure attachments. This programme was initially set up in 2005-8,
      supported by Big Lottery funding (&#163;206,000). In the period 2008-13, it has
      been delivered to 1,733 vulnerable mothers and infants in the UK including
      mothers with postnatal mental health problems in deprived London
      communities, mothers who are homeless and seeking asylum (funded by
      Rowntree), and mothers with severe psychiatric problems [a]. In
      2008, the home office provided funding of &#163;114,000 to extend the PIP
      programme to mothers in four UK Prisons [b]. The programme is
      recommended by the Department of Education as an evidence-based
      intervention for parents and infants under one year of age experiencing
      difficulties in the parent and baby relationship [c].
    Based directly on our work, colleagues at Yale University developed the Minding
        the Baby (MTB) programme, which is designed to promote parental
      reflective functioning (RF) [d]. MTB supports the mother to
      develop her capacity to think about what is happening in her baby's mind,
      which helps her to respond sensitively, improving the quality of their
      relationship. Since 2008, MTB has supported 133 impoverished mothers in
      the US. In 2010 a training institute was created and 67 clinicians from
      the US and Europe have attended so far [e].
    Recently we initiated a new partnership with the NSPCC to support the
      development and evaluation of Minding the Baby for highly vulnerable
      families in the UK. This five-year programme involves delivery of a
      comprehensive home visiting package to 320 high-risk families in three UK
      cities. By July 2013, 105 families had so far benefited from the
      programme. The Head of Strategy &amp; Development at the NSPCC reports the
      impact of our work as follows:
    "Fearon and Fonagy have made an important and distinctive contribution
        to national policy in the field of early years intervention and
        prevention... Their developmental approach has influenced the policy
        narrative around the importance of sensitive and critical periods for
        intervention across different stages of early childhood. They have
        advocated effectively for an attachment perspective and clearly
        articulated the importance of parental sensitivity as a key predictor of
        child outcomes of interest to policy makers. The impacts of this work
        can be very concretely seen in policy documents such as the NSPCC's
        highly influential report `All Babies Count' which received wide acclaim
        amongst policy makers... The Unit has also had a significant impact on
        practice. Fonagy and Fearon have delivered training in early child
        development and attachment to almost all of the NSPCC's workforce of
        social workers, psychologists and midwives delivering services to
        babies. Their work has also been highly influential on shaping NSPCC's
        strategy and pioneering programme of new services for babies and their
        families. All of the new services are influenced by a strong attachment
        perspective and several have integrated a very explicit focus on the
        role of maternal reflective function as a protective factor against
        abuse and neglect" [f].
    Using a related model of intervention, we have worked with a team in
      Ethiopia to train mothers with malnourished infants in an attachment-based
      intervention, Play Therapy. It has been shown that malnutrition impacts
      negatively on the quality of the parent-child attachment relationship, and
      has serious physical, social and emotional consequences. This intervention
      aims to improve the mother's reflective function so that she can provide
      appropriate emotional stimulation to her child. The intervention helps
      mother and child re-engage and has been found to facilitate children's
      weight gain and faster discharge from hospital. Mothers are trained by
      local volunteers in the community. Since 2010, local youths have been
      trained and in turn have trained 191 mothers in the intervention. The
      results have been presented to the Ethiopian Health Minister, and Play
      Therapy is to be rolled out to wider populations in East Africa severely
      affected by drought [g].
    Measurement tools
    We have developed a range of specialised measurement instruments that are
      now widely used by clinicians to assess attachment and reflective
      function, including the Reflective Functioning (RF) scale, the Story Stem
      Assessment Profile (SSAP) and the Child Attachment Interview (CAI). Our
      courses in the administration and coding of these measures have been
      attended by more than 500 active clinicians aiming to use the instrument
      for their clinical assessments and court reports. We have also provided
      training to over 100 NSPCC practitioners (2012, 2013) and two County
      Councils (Portsmouth and Buckinghamshire in 2011, 2012 and 2013) involved
      in preventing child maltreatment. We have also run numerous clinical
      training courses in our attachment-based interventions that have been
      attended by more than 400 practitioners since 2008 [h].
    These measures are now frequently used in child care proceedings by
      social workers needing to advise Child Protection Services and the Courts
      about the quality and safety of placements. The CAI is recognised as the
      best instrument available for evaluating the quality of the bond between
      child and parents or foster-parents. Examples of Boroughs which use the
      instrument include Southwark, Surrey and Fife [i]. The Clinical
      Lead for the Family Assessment and Safeguarding Service and the Infant
      Parent Perinatal Service (IPPS) at Oxford Health NHS Foundation Trust
      (which provides various services in Buckinghamshire, Wiltshire and Bath
      and North East Somerset, as well as in Oxfordshire) reports the following
      regarding the impact of our research on their services:
    "It would be difficult to overstate the contribution the
        ground-breaking research conducted at UCL in attachment and in
        particular reflective function has had on our services... It has
        profoundly influenced the design of our clinical services... Crucially,
        the research and trainings provided have equipped us with effective
        measures that allow for accurate assessment in both Court and clinical
        cases and to measure outcomes following our treatment programmes" [j].
    Influencing Policy
    In part as a result of our work, the need to assess the quality of
      children's attachments and intervene to promote attachment in order to
      deliver best outcomes in the health and social care of young children is
      now broadly accepted in the UK. We have influenced policy through academic
      publishing of policy-relevant papers, talks at major national policy and
      practice conferences and direct engagement with policy-making. Our
      research contributed directly to Frank Field's government inquiry into
      Early Intervention and the Scottish Government's National Risk Framework
      to support the assessment of children and young people. We have also
      recently presented to the Secretary of State for Education, Michael Gove,
      and his Early Years Minister Liz Truss, to inform policy regarding infant
      attachment and its long-term consequences for children's life chances. We
      also advise the parliamentary Foundation Years Action Group [k],
      led by Frank Field and have been visited by a South Korean Assembly
      delegation who were seeking advice on how attachment interventions can be
      implemented to reduce aggression in schools [l]. In July 2013,
      Fonagy was appointed as chair of the NICE Guideline Development Group on
      attachment and the care of Looked After Children and adoptees, a group to
      which Fearon has also been appointed [m].
    
ImpactSummary

    Research into parent-child attachment carried out by Professor Pasco
      Fearon and colleagues at UCL has had a major impact on clinical services,
      policy and wider society through the development of: 1) novel assessment
      tools for measuring parent-child attachment, which are used in a variety
      of clinical services; 2) innovative prevention and intervention programmes
      deployed throughout the world; 3) dissemination of research evidence and
      best practice, through training and policy work in the UK and
      internationally.
    
UnderpinningResearch

    UCL's Research Department of Clinical, Educational and Health Psychology
      is home to one of the world's leading centres of excellence in the study
      of parent-child attachment and its importance for lifespan mental health.
      The work is led by three clinical academics (Professors Peter Fonagy, Mary
      Target and Pasco Fearon) who combine expertise in developmental
      psychology, clinical psychology and neuroscience.
    The origins of this work can be traced back to research at UCL published
      in 1994 in which Fonagy and colleagues demonstrated for the first time
      that the security of the parent-child attachment bond at one year of age
      could be predicted from an interview with the parent regarding their own
      attachment history prior to the child's birth [1]. Most
      importantly from the point of view of intervention, the work that followed
      showed that a parent's capacity to make sense of their early experiences
      and relationships in terms of mental states (thoughts, feelings, beliefs,
      emotions), a capacity referred to as `reflective function', is a
      critical factor that shapes the quality of care they provide to their
      infant and the security of the evolving attachment relationship [2, 3].
      A monograph detailing the theory was published in 2002, and has sold over
      10,000 copies [4].
    A key implication of this research was that insecure relationships may be
      perpetuated from one generation to the next. Using behaviour-genetic
      methods, the group showed that this process is indeed mediated by
      environmental processes, not via genetic transmission, and is linked to
      the quality of care [5]. Furthermore, the group made a critical
      contribution to the demonstration that these early differences in
      attachment security have long-term consequences for child development [6,
        7]. Recently, the group has begun to shed light on the brain bases
      of attachment, particularly the critical role played by the mesolimbic
      dopamine system and the neuropeptide oxytocin [8].
    The notion that patterns of relationship are laid down in early life, may
      be relatively stable over time, and may be passed from one generation to
      the next is an exceptionally important one when thinking about prevention
      strategies for breaking cycles of disadvantage. As we detail below, our
      group has been very active in bringing the theory, tools and interventions
      that have arisen from our research on attachment into the public domain in
      order to promote young children's health and wellbeing. Key to the success
      of these efforts has been our partnership with the Anna Freud Centre
      (AFC), where joint posts with UCL enable many of the group's clinical
      implementation and training programmes to be based. The UCL-AFC
      collaboration has created an effective platform for our findings to guide
      the training and skills of practitioners, to inform social and health
      policy and to impact directly on the welfare of vulnerable children and
      families. Key beneficiaries of our attachment research include teenage
      parents, parents raising infants in extreme poverty and parents with
      mental health problems. Our work has also directly impacted on the care of
      children who have been maltreated or are under threat of removal by the
      courts.
    