CaseStudyId: 41487
Title: 
    Parkinson's Disease &#8212; recognition, quantification and treatment of
      non-motor features
    

ImpactDetails

    Parkinson's disease is the second commonest neurodegenerative disease,
      now with a lifetime risk in the UK of 4%. Approximately 200,000 people
      suffer from PD in the UK (prevalence ~1/300). The treatment of PD is
      currently directed to improving the motor symptoms caused by dopamine
      deficiency. This is effective in the early stages of the disease, but with
      progression, non-motor, non-dopaminergic features such as cognitive,
      autonomic and psychiatric disturbances dominate and cause a significant
      deterioration of quality of life. Before our work in this area, there was
      little recognition of these non-motor features and no means to assess
      their prevalence, importance or measure their response to treatment.
      Physicians/neurologists in the clinic had no means to evaluate the extent
      and severity of this important aspect of PD, and patients had no way to
      communicate easily the type, severity and frequency of their non-motor
      problems. The scales that we have developed have provided clinicians with
      the tools to assess non-motor symptoms and our questionnaires have given
      the patient the method to convey the severity of the impact of their
      non-motor features on their life. These aspects are crucial in delivering
      improved treatment and care to both the patient and more useful
      information to the care-giver.
    Our scales have now been widely incorporated into clinical practice. For
      example, the National Parkinson's Audit Report 2011 noted that many
      services were using our questionnaire in preference to one of those
      recommended in the Occupational Therapy Best Practice Guidelines [a].
      Use of the questionnaire is recommended by Parkinson's UK who have made it
      available in print and on their website. They recommend that: "This is
        a questionnaire for people with Parkinson's to complete to help health
        professionals assess their non-motor Parkinson's symptoms. It should be
        completed before visiting your doctor or Parkinson's nurse" [b].
      The scale was incorporated into the Department of Health's 18-week
      commissioning pathway for Tremor (Parkinson's Disease) which recommended
      it as a quality of life outcome measure [c]. It is recommended in
      Scottish Guidelines on Diagnosis and pharmacological management of
        Parkinson's disease (SIGN 113) [d].
    Services treating PD require the questionnaire to be completed in
      advance, for example King's College Hospital: "What is required before
      referring a patient: For Parkinson's NMSQuest to be completed as per
      Department of Health 18-week pathway for Parkinson's (tremor)" [e].
      Our clinical services for PD patients at both the Royal Free and UCLH now
      routinely use the non-motor questionnaire and scale as part of the
      holistic clinical evaluation of Parkinson's disease patients as a means to
      design therapeutic strategies at a personal patient level, and to evaluate
      the effect of the strategy. We are now working with the Chief Executive of
      Parkinson's UK and his team to develop the model for the UK's first `UK
      Centre of Excellence' for the management pathway of Parkinson's disease to
      include non-motor assessment [f]. This model will then be rolled
      out across the UK.
    The scales and questionnaires have been adopted by a number of societies
      and are widely recommended in guidelines. The International Parkinson and
      Movement Disorder Society (an international professional society of
      healthcare professionals) provides our questionnaire on their website [g].
      The Parkinson Society of Canada has also produced two guides (one for
      patients and one for clinicians) which are based on the NMS questionnaire
      [h]. The Quality Standards Subcommittee of the American Academy of
      Neurology reported that: "The NMS Quest study established a valid and
        reliable questionnaire to identify nonmotor symptoms in PD" [i].
      The scale is also recommended by the European Parkinson's Disease
      Association who say that: "This 30-point questionnaire recognises that
        non-movement difficulties often occur in Parkinson's and that it is
        important for a doctor to be aware of their extent and the impact they
        have on life so that treatment takes these into account. Areas covered
        include sleep, Constipation, vision, smell, sexual problems and memory.
        The inclusion of such topics in the questionnaire has been found helpful
        in opening a dialogue on subjects that might otherwise be ignored or may
        be considered to be embarrassing" [j]. The US Parkinson's
      Disease Non-Motor Group also provide the questionnaire [k]. The
      questionnaire has also been validated for use in other populations and
      translated accordingly. It is in use in Japan, North America and many
      countries in Europe.
    The non-motor questionnaire and scale have recently been incorporated as
      secondary endpoints into international Phase II/III clinical trials for
      symptomatic treatment in Parkinson disease [l].
    
ImpactSummary

    We established a comprehensive international collaboration to develop,
      validate and apply new scales for the identification and quantification of
      non-motor symptoms and signs in Parkinson's disease (PD). This was
      intended to provide tools to assess response to treatment, help define the
      clinical prodrome of PD and provide a means to evaluate novel therapies
      designed to modify the course of disease. The scales have been produced,
      validated and published. They have been incorporated as end points in
      international clinical trials for PD and have been introduced by
      specialist societies and NHS commissioners as a standard of care for PD
      patients.
    
UnderpinningResearch

    UCL has developed a major research programme in Parkinson's disease. This
      encompasses the basic sciences, clinical research and clinical trial
      development and execution. Parkinson's disease is a neurodegenerative
      condition that affects multiple areas of the brain as it progresses and
      produces motor symptoms (bradykinesia, rigidity, tremor) and a range of
      non-motor features that include cognitive impairment, autonomic
      dysfunction, psychiatric disturbances etc. [1]. These non-motor
      features dominate the patient's quality-of-life in mid to advanced
      Parkinson's disease. In addition, it has been recognised that certain
      non-motor features may precede the onset of motor symptoms and therefore
      the diagnosis of Parkinson's disease. This emphasised the potential
      importance of non-motor features in the pre-motor clinical prodrome of
      Parkinson's disease [2].
    The Department of Clinical Neurosciences has played a major role in
      research into the cause and treatment of Parkinson's disease and was the
      first to describe the mitochondrial contribution to this and other
      neurodegenerative diseases. From 1993, the Department led research on
      defining the role of mitochondria in neurodegeneration, specifically in
      Parkinson's disease, Huntington's disease and in Friedreich ataxia,
      publishing several seminal articles which are now citation classics
      (citations &gt;400). As part of this research the pattern of
      neurodegeneration in these diseases and the corresponding clinical
      deficits became more clearly defined, and the Department played a leading
      role in this particularly in Friedreich ataxia. Novel scales for the
      assessment of ataxia and the impact on patient quality of life were
      developed. As part of this exercise, it became clear that there was also
      an unmet need in this area, specifically in the context of Parkinson's
      disease and its non-motor symptoms.
    In 2006, the Department organised and co-chaired with Dr K Ray Chaudhuri
      (King's College London) the creation and development of the International
      Non-Motor Study Group for Parkinson's disease. The intention of this group
      was to develop patient-reported symptom scales and physician-recorded
      non-motor sign scales for the assessment and quantitation of non-motor
      features for use in clinical management, research and clinical trials.
    The study group produced the non-motor symptom questionnaire (NMSQuest)
      and the non-motor symptom scale (NMSS) [3]. These were rigorously
      assessed for validity and reproducibility, and validated in several
      European and Asian languages. Both the questionnaire and symptom scale
      have been used in clinical trials as endpoints in the assessment of novel
      therapies for Parkinson's disease.
    The questionnaire and scale have also been assessed in research to define
      the clinical prodrome of Parkinson's disease, particularly in certain
      stratified groups such as those with glucocerebrosidase mutations. This
      research has demonstrated that selective cognitive impairment and hyposmia
      precede the onset of motor dysfunction in this genetically determined
      group. The non-motor questionnaire and symptom scale are now being used in
      conjunction with imaging to select those amongst this group who are
      particularly at risk of developing Parkinson's disease. These individuals
      will then be offered participation in a clinical trial of novel small
      molecule chaperones to enhance glucocerebrosidase activity and reduce
      alpha-synuclein levels [4]. Research from UCL suggests that such
      therapy may be generally applicable across the Parkinson's disease
      aetiology spectrum.
    Thus the development of the non-motor symptoms scales has had significant
      implications for patient management, an understanding of the evolution of
      Parkinson's disease, clinical trials and in particular the development of
      disease modifying therapies.
    