CaseStudyId: 41506
Title: 
    The creation of neuropsychological assessments and services for Deaf
      patients with neurological impairments
    

ImpactDetails

    The programme of research described above has had impacts on clinical
      services for deaf patients, and on wider government policy in this area.
    As part of our initial studies of signers with stroke and signers with
      dementia, we developed the first ever standardised cognitive and language
      screening tests designed for signers with acquired neurological
      impairments [a]. We have disseminated this work to professionals
      (speech and language therapists, psychologists, physicians, social
      workers, etc.) through publications and invitations to present our work,
      for example, to the German Federal Ministry of Family Affairs, Senior
      Citizens, Women and Youth (March 2013) and at the Alzheimer Association
      International Conference (July 2013) and have made assessment tools
      available to clinicians and researchers working with a variety of signers
      with developmental and acquired impairments in their language.
    The Cognitive Screening Test is currently undergoing evaluation at the
      University of Cologne for use in Germany and at the Sourds et Sant&#233; &#8212; Nord
      Pas de Calais network based at the Groupe Hospitalier de l'Institut
      Catholique de Lille for use in France. We are also in discussion with
      colleagues in Austria, the Netherlands and Sweden about possible
      adaptations. We receive around 50 enquiries a month requesting information
      and services.
    The research team met with staff from the Specialist Cognitive Disorders
      clinic at the National Hospital for Neurology and Neurosurgery in Queens
      Square in February 2011 and it was agreed to establish the first ever
      monthly neurological clinic for signers [b]. Patients are referred
      to the clinic for assessment of dementia or other neurodegenerative
      disorders; they are Deaf BSL users presenting with acquired cognitive
      difficulties from all parts of the UK. By early 2013, 18 deaf patients had
      benefitted from detailed assessment and diagnosis. This is the first
      service of its kind anywhere in the world. It was promoted by the Royal
      Association for Deaf People [c] and in an article in the
      Alzheimer's Society's Living with Dementia magazine in May 2012 which
      reported that the research described above "is already benefiting Deaf
        people through a new clinic service" [d]. NHS Clinical
      services can now offer assessment leading to appropriate interventions and
      services. Patients, families of patients and carers, and the NHS have
      benefitted from the establishment of interventions and services for this
      population. Before the establishment of the clinic, deaf patients
      experienced delays in assessment: some patients had been passed around
      between services for three years or more without a diagnosis because
      cognitive tests used in mainstream clinics are unsuitable [e].
    Patients are typically seen in the early to mid stages of dementia. The
      tests give a clear indication of cognitive impairment and allow confident
      diagnosis in conjunction with brain scans, at an early stage of cognitive
      impairment, thus allowing speedier and more accurate diagnosis of dementia
      and other acquired neurological impairments in Deaf people, enabling
      access to services which should in turn lead to better health outcomes and
      reduced costs to the NHS and local authority care services. The clinic
      thus represents a significant step towards reducing wider healthcare
      inequalities for deaf people in the UK. Improved diagnostic tools should
      demonstrate health needs in the deaf population, thus enabling clinical
      leads to plan appropriate provision. Meeting clinical needs earlier should
      allow for more timely, sensitive and efficient management of individual
      cases [f].
    We have also highlighted our work directly to the Deaf community through
      our unique programme of public engagement work, which has included the
      "DCAL Roadshow", presenting our research at Deaf Community Centres in
      different regions of Great Britain and Northern Ireland, and annual visits
      and presentations at the English Deaf Darby and Joan Club holiday weeks,
      attended by over 1000 Deaf people aged 50-90. The research and the clinic
      have featured on BBC See Hear (2010, 2012) and in the British Sign
      Language Broadcasting Trust's film Living with Parkinson's on
      Film4 (2012) [g].
    In relation to policy, both the research and the data obtained through
      the clinic have served as a springboard for policy development. The Deaf
      with Dementia team were asked to prepare briefing documents for the
      government, so that Deaf people with dementia could be included in the
      development of the equalities action plan with respect to the National
      Dementia Strategy (Deaf People with Dementia, Dec 2010) [h]; and
      briefing notes prepared for Paul Burstow, Minister of State for Care
      Services, at his request (Deaf people and Dementia, Oct 2011). The All
      Party Parliamentary Group (APPG) in Deafness have agreed to support joint
      proposals on health and social care developed by DCAL in collaboration
      with Action on Hearing Loss (AoHL); we launched our joint report in March
      2013 in conjunction with the APPG to press for the creation of permanent
      services for this population [i].
    
ImpactSummary

    As a direct result of research conducted by Professor Bencie Woll at the
      Deafness Cognition and Language Research Centre (DCAL), UCL, the NHS has
      established the first neuropsychology clinic for Deaf patients who use
      British Sign Language within the Cognitive Disorders clinic at the
      National Hospital for Neurology and Neurosurgery (NHNN). By developing
      services for this under-researched group, NHS provision has become
      accessible for the first time, benefiting both patients and service
      providers. We have disseminated our resources around the world, and have
      highlighted them to the Deaf community through a unique programme of
      public engagement. Our research has also influenced UK government policy
      on Deafness.
    
UnderpinningResearch

    Early identification, accessible information and `living well with
      dementia' are key aims of the Government's dementia strategy but
      previously, cognitive assessments in British Sign Language (BSL) did not
      exist, and so these aims went unmet for deaf people. Because BSL is
      unrelated to spoken English, linguistic, cultural and educational
      differences mean that the use of interpreters or written English formats
      is unreliable and error prone, particularly as communication itself is
      part of the assessment. Diagnosis of deaf patients is typically late with
      adverse consequences for access to medication, rehabilitation and care
      planning.
    Deaf people do not have equal access to NHS neurology services. In an
      earlier survey of NHS neurological services we had identified that Deaf
      people were referred to speech and language therapy services following
      stroke at about 20% of the rate of referrals for hearing patients. It is
      likely that the situation is similar for those affected by other acquired
      neurological and neuropsychiatric conditions, such as head injury,
      progressive neurological diseases, and schizophrenia.
    The underpinning approach to our research is to use sign language as a
      model system for studying language more generally, by enabling separate
      consideration of speech and language. Within the area of acquired
      neurological and neuropsychiatric impairment, we have undertaken several
      studies. Following our earlier studies at City University, which explored
      aphasia and apraxia in signers with stroke, we have undertaken a series of
      case studies from 2005 onwards of motor impairments in signers [1, 2].
      For example, we have shown through a case study of a signer with
      progressive supranuclear palsy that the characteristic feature of
      palilalia is found in sign language, indicating that theories of palilalia
      which relate it specifically to speech are incorrect [2].
    We have also explored the manifestations of voice hallucinations in deaf
      people with schizophrenia, providing novel insights into the nature of
      subvocal thought and sensory feedback loops [3, 4]. We have
      continued to maintain an information and advice service for clinicians and
      have undertaken opportunistic collection of data as and when cases
      present.
    In 2010 we began a joint project with the University of Manchester, City
      University London and Royal Association for Deaf People (RAD). This
      project, funded by the Alzheimer's Society, aims to improve early
      diagnosis and management among Deaf people who use BSL. The DCAL/UCL team
      was primarily responsible for Study 1 which focused on the Older Healthy
      Deaf Brain. Diagnosis of dementia in the Deaf community is considerably
      delayed because of limited recognition of the nature of their impairments,
      the absence of appropriate assessment tools, and poor communication
      between clinical staff, patients and carers [5]. This study
      included developing a profile of normal ageing within the Deaf Community
      from a cognitive perspective. This was used to develop a screening
      instrument for dementia in BSL that is linguistically and culturally
      appropriate and that is normed for the Deaf population [6].
    The underpinning research was undertaken by Professor Bencie Woll,
      Director of DCAL, Dr Joanna Atkinson, Research Fellow, and Dr Tanya
      Denmark, Post-doctoral Researcher.
    