CaseStudyId: 41588
Title: 
    CATH structural classification of proteins aids drug discovery in the
      pharmaceutical industry
    

ImpactDetails

    Breadth of use of CATH, PDBsum and LIGPLOT
    The CATH classification is made available on a UCL-hosted website,
      maintained by the Orengo group [a]. This internationally renowned
      resource is one of the leading protein structure classifications in the
      field. Web access to CATH ranges from 8,900 (Google Analytics) to 22,500
      (Webalyzer) unique visits per month and the number of pages accessed
      varies from 85,000 to 2m per month depending on the method used for
      analysing access. Two thirds of these web accesses are from industry-based
      sites [b].
    CATH data is further disseminated through DAS and the InterPro web
      server, at the European Bioinformatics Institute (EBI). InterPro is one of
      the most widely used web portals by biologists in industry and academia,
      with more than five million web page accesses per month. It combines
      protein family data from multiple resources to assign greater confidence.
      DAS was established by 30 European partners as part of the Biosapiens
      network, headed by Janet Thornton whilst the InterPro server is being
      developed by a consortium of eight European partners, including CATH.
      Information from CATH is also disseminated via the web portal of the
      international Protein Databank (PDB) resource [c], the primary
      source of protein structures. Further links to CATH are provided by many
      international web-based computational biology resources (e.g Pfam, BRENDA
      [b]).
    Thornton and Orengo have given talks on CATH and PDBsum in Europe, the
      United States, Japan, South Korea and India, including through the EBI
      Industry program [d], and to computational biologists at several
      pharmaceutical companies. Orengo spoke at a Gordon Conference on drug
      design in 2009, which was attended by a significant number of researchers
      from the pharmaceutical industry [e].
    CATH, PDBsum and the threading algorithm were three of the four major UCL
      bioinformatics resources used to establish the UCL company Inpharmatica in
      1998. This was involved in predicting structures and functions for
      proteins via the `Biopendium'. Inpharmatica sold this and other related
      software packages to several large pharmaceutical companies including
      Pfizer, Astra Zeneca and Glaxo-Wellcome. Inpharmatica was acquired by
      Galapagos in 2006 [f].
    More recently, the latest structure comparison algorithms underpinning
      CATH (CATHEDRAL) and LIGPLOT have been distributed directly to
      pharmaceutical companies including [text removed for publication].
      Together these tools have generated [text removed for publication]
      in licence income to UCL within the census period [g]. PDBsum is
      widely used by pharmaceutical companies with 34,000 unique visitors/month
      in total (1.1m web hits).
    [text removed for publication]
    Papers published by Thornton and Orengo have been cited 13 times across
      11 patent documents published in the assessment period, indicating the
      commercial relevance of their work. The patents are filed across the USA,
      Europe and Internationally through the PCT system and are assigned to GSK
      Ltd, Biogen Idec Inc. and Pharnext [i].
    Specific applications to problems in the pharmaceutical industry
    CATH is routinely used by the pharmaceutical industry to identify the
      structures of proteins implicated in disease. CATH prediction methods and
      domain assignments are widely used by industry, as are the methods for
      analysing the structures (e.g. LIGPLOT, PROCHECK). CATH is widely used by
      researchers in the pharmaceutical industry to explore protein structure
      function relationships and to aid in drug design. Structure is highly
      conserved during evolution and 3D information can give better clues to the
      molecular mechanisms associated with a protein's function than purely
      sequence data. Since very few human proteins are experimentally
      characterised (&lt;10%), CATH and related resources are used to search for
      homologues with known, experimentally validated functions and the
      structural data associated with these relatives can be then be exploited
      to build 3D models for the human proteins. In addition, the CATH
      classification can be searched with the structures of proteins which are
      potential drug targets to identify close relatives which might also bind
      the target drug, giving rise to side effects.
    [text removed for publication]
    CATH has been exploited by the NIH-funded, international, structural
      genomics initiatives to select proteins from pathogenic organisms for
      structure determination to aid drug design. Since 2000, more than 3,000
      protein structures have been solved by these initiatives representing
      about 30% of the unique structures deposited into the PDB from all
      sources, worldwide, during this period. These structures have shed light
      on how structure is linked to function and provided important details of
      binding sites in proteins implicated in cancer and pathogen associated
      diseases.
    
ImpactSummary

    The CATH classification of protein structure, developed at the Institute
      of Structural and Molecular Biology, UCL, by Janet Thornton and Christine
      Orengo, has been used widely across the pharmaceutical industry and
      academia to guide experiments on proteins. This has led to significant
      cost and time savings in drug discovery. The UCL-hosted online CATH
      database receives around 10,000 unique visitors per month, and is a
      partner in InterPro &#8212; the most frequently accessed protein function
      annotation server available.
    
UnderpinningResearch

    Less than 10% of proteins have detailed experimental characterisation &#8212;
      even in human &#8212; and computational approaches have emerged to predict the
      function of a protein by identifying evolutionarily related proteins
      (homologues) whose functions are likely to be similar and which have
      already been experimentally characterised (e.g. in fly or worm).
    One of the first classifications of proteins, CATH (denoting protein
      Class, Architecture, Topology, Homologous superfamily), was established by
      Orengo and Thornton in 1994 [1, 2]. CATH groups homologues
      according to their structural and therefore likely functional similarity,
      using a combination of automated and manual procedures. The major level in
      CATH (homologous Superfamily) groups together proteins which have clearly
      descended from a common ancestor. The early success of this work led to
      Orengo being awarded an MRC Senior Fellowship in 1995 (for 10 years in
      total) to extend the classification. Further research led to powerful
      algorithms for predicting which genome sequences could be classified in
      CATH. CATH now classifies ~20 million protein sequences &#8212; ~70% of domain
      sequences from 2,000 completed genomes and ~60% of domain sequences from
      human.
    In 1995, individual structures in CATH were provided with highly valuable
      additional data in the form of PDBsum webpages [3] with LIGPLOT
      analyses [4], developed by postdoctoral researcher Roman Laskowski
      in the Thornton group, and the ProCHECK suite was developed to assess
      structure quality [5].
    CATH has been involved in several national and international consortia
      and Networks of Excellence providing structural/functional annotations for
      proteins. These integrated multiple resources to improve confidence and
      ensure much greater coverage. TrEMBLOR, Integr8, IMPACT, and BIOSAPIENS
      consortia disseminated the integrated data widely to academia and industry
      via web sites and web servers. Other consortia (e.g. ENFIN, IMI-EUROPAIN)
      promoted collaborations with experimental groups in academia and industry,
      to ensure that the function prediction tools were adopted more widely by
      experimentalists working on biological systems related to human health and
      disease.
    Since 2000 the Thornton and Orengo groups have exploited CATH in
      collaboration with structural biology groups in the NIH-funded Protein
      Structure Initiative (PSI) &#8212; a structural genomics initiative which
      targets proteins in bacteria, associated with pathogenesis, for structure
      determination. PSI is a large strategic project, (funding of &gt;$150
      million) and involving &gt;20 research groups and several hundred
      scientists across USA and Europe.
    In 2009, further research allowed sub-classification of functional
      families in CATH. CATH function prediction methods ranked 7th worldwide
      (out of 56) in an international assessment [6]. The unique
      combination of structure and sequence data in CATH allows accurate
      detection of functionally important sites to guide mutagenesis experiments
      and explain the damaging effects of mutations associated with disease.
    CATH is being integrated with the only other world-leading structure
      classification, SCOP, to give the most comprehensive classification
      available (Genome3D). Other major structure prediction resources are being
      included (Gene3D, SUPERFAMILY, GenTHREADER, PHYRE) to provide consensus
      annotations via a common web portal. Genome3D is expected to be widely
      used by Industry.
    Christine Orengo has worked at UCL since 1991 and is currently Professor
      of Bioinformatics; Janet Thornton was at UCL until 2001, when she moved to
      the European Bioinformatics Institute.
    