CaseStudyId: 41640
Title: 
    A new pharmacological approach for treating ADHD
    

ImpactDetails

    Attention Deficit Hyperactivity Disorder has a worldwide prevalence in
      children of about 5% and persists in adulthood in 50-60% of cases. ADHD is
      not a primary learning disorder but its core diagnostic features are
      deficits in cognitive performance and response control [`hyperactivity',
      `inattentiveness' and `impulsivity']. These impairments
      disrupt academic development and can lead to complex social problems in
      adulthood. The majority of adult patients further experience serious
      co-morbidity including: perseveration, substance misuse, emotional
      lability, bipolar disorder, criminality and suicidality, all of which
      impair the quality of life of the patient and their family and can reduce
      life-expectancy. An unexplained increased risk of other medical conditions
      (e.g. obesity, asthma) as well as accidents and social problems leads to
      ADHD patients costing 2-fold more than the average patient (NICE, 2009).
      It was predicted that about &#163;78 million would be spent on pharmacotherapy
      alone for ADHD patients in the UK in 2012 (NICE, 2009). This figure did
      not take into account the broader economic costs of this illness.
    Only three drugs are licensed to treat ADHD in the UK: the
      psychostimulants d-amphetamine &amp; methylphenidate, and the
      noradrenaline uptake inhibitor atomoxetine. There is widespread unease
      about long-term use of psychostimulants, and all these treatments can have
      harmful cardiovascular side-effects and carry a risk of misuse.
      Furthermore, more than 25% of patients do not respond to any of these
      treatments. Thus, there is a pressing need for a new approach to
      pharmacotherapy of ADHD, based on a strong scientific rationale.
    New ADHD Animal Model: Commercial Impact
    Our research has led to the discovery that disruption of NK1 receptor
      function causes deficits in cognitive performance and response control
      similar to those seen in ADHD patients. This research has opened up new
      directions for investigation of the underlying causes of ADHD as well as
      the discovery and development of new drug targets. A paper describing some
      of our recent findings has received more than 2,700 hits since it was
      published in May 2011. This research has already received MRC funding of
      more than &#163;600,000 [a].
    We were awarded an EU patent in 2010 relating to the use of the NK1R-/-
      mouse to investigate the underlying neurochemical abnormalities in ADHD
      and as a screen for putative drug treatments for ADHD [b]. We have
      a US patent application pending [c]. A subsidiary of Charles
      River, Cerebricon (based in Finland), which specializes in validation and
      marketing of rodent behavioural models, has negotiated an exclusive
      licence with UCL Business [d]. This enables them to market the
      NK1R-/-for use in research related to the causes and treatment of ADHD and
      now advertise this on their website. This venture is expected to be highly
      successful: "In conjunction with Cerebricon's strategy of increasing
        our portfolio of pre-clinical models by extending from neurology to
        psychiatry we are very pleased to have the opportunity to in-license
        what we believe will prove to be the best and most fully validated mouse
        model of ADHD for our drug development clientele" &#8212; Dr Yrjanheikki,
      CEO of Cerebricon [e].
    New Genetic Locus for ADHD in Humans: Health Impact
    Our research using the NK1R KO mice led us to discover a link between the
      mutations in the human homologue of the gene, tacr1, and ADHD.
      This discovery is significant to clinical psychiatry at two levels. One is
      that new treatments targeted at specific individuals, according to the
      genetic subtype of the disorder that they have inherited, can now be
      attempted. Secondly, the findings identify a molecular pathophysiology
      which cuts across traditional diagnostic boundaries and indicates that the
      use of biomarkers which identify genetic effects acting in sub categories
      of mental illness will be more powerful and useful than traditional
      clinical diagnostic categories [f].
    Public Engagement
    Because of ADHD's often disruptive nature, sufferers can face difficulty
      in public situations. Increasing public understanding of the disorder is
      therefore extremely important. Clare Stanford makes regular media
      appearances to discuss psychopharmacology in general [g], and has
      written an article on ADHD, which is aimed at the general public and
      posted on the website (Information for the Public) hosted by the British
      Association for Psychopharmacology [h].
    The development of new treatments for almost all human diseases and
      disorders requires animal research. However, this can be a contentious
      issue. Clare Stanford is President of the Laboratory Animal Science
      Association and has contributed to meetings that aim to increase public
      understanding of animal research (e.g. meetings for the RSPCA) [i].
    
ImpactSummary

    Clare Stanford's group has opened up a new line of research for drug
      treatment of Attention Deficit Hyperactivity Disorder. Based on this work,
      UCL Business has been awarded an EU patent for the NK1R `knockout' mouse
      as an investigative tool and pharmaceutical screen. Cerebricon, a
      subsidiary of Charles River, has taken an exclusive licence to market this
      mouse and advertise it on their website. Our studies have also enabled us
      to identify a new genetic locus in which abnormalities are linked to ADHD
      in humans, and to identify a new drug candidate for treating ADHD.
    
UnderpinningResearch

    The core diagnostic features of Attention Deficit Hyperactivity Disorder
      (ADHD) are hyperactivity, inattentiveness and impulsivity.
      All current drug treatments for ADHD augment monoamine transmission in the
      brain. First-choice treatments are the psychostimulants d-amphetamine and
      methylphenidate, despite being ineffective in nearly 30% of patients.
    Several rat and mouse inbred strains have been used in preclinical
      studies of ADHD. All express one or more of the abnormalities seen in
      ADHD, which are relieved by psychostimulants to some extent. However, none
      matches all key characteristics of ADHD and its treatment.
    Our experiments with the substance P-preferring (NK1) receptor knockout
      (NK1R-/-) mouse, in collaboration with Professor Stephen Hunt (UCL),
      started in 2004. We aimed to explain why blocking the activation of NK1R
      has antidepressant effects in humans, as was thought to be the case at the
      time. In the course of this work, we discovered that NK1R-/- mice have
      profound abnormalities in monoamine transmission in the brain. As well as
      an increase in serotonin release, which had been reported already, we
      found increased noradrenaline release and a striking deficit in dopamine
      release in the prefrontal cortex. The latter change is inconsistent with
      an antidepressant profile. We also noted that NK1R-/-mice are hyperactive
      compared with wildtypes [1]. This hyperactivity is induced by
      either genetic mutation (NK1R-/-) or pharmacological antagonism of NK1R
      and so is a direct consequence of a lack of functional NK1R. Moreover, it
      was prevented by treatment with d-amphetamine or methylphenidate, as in
      ADHD [3].
    These findings led us to propose that neurochemical and behavioural
      abnormalities, arising from a lack of functional NK1R, could underlie
      abnormalities seen in ADHD. This prompted a human genetic study, in
      collaboration with Professor Hugh Gurling (UCL), which found a strong
      association between four genetic markers in the tacr1 gene (the
      human equivalent of the NK1R gene) and ADHD in a large population sample [4].
      Since then, polymorphism(s) of the tacr1 gene have also been found
      to be associated with bipolar affective disorder, suicidal behaviour and
      alcoholism, all of which show a high incidence of co-morbidity with ADHD.
    In an MRC-funded project (2008-11), we showed that NK1R-/- mice display a
      higher behavioural inattentiveness, impulsivity, and perseveration
      (which has been reported in ADHD patients) and that d-amphetamine relieved
      perseveration but not inattentiveness or impulsivity
      [5]. This pattern of deficits in cognitive performance and their
      response to amphetamine is consistent with the abnormalities in monoamine
      transmission in the NK1R-/- mouse, and could explain why some ADHD
      patients do not respond to psychostimulants.
    All these findings strengthen the validity of using NK1R-/- mice to study
      underlying causes of, and treatments for, ADHD. They also underpin our
      prediction that drugs that augment activation of NK1R, or its downstream
      targets, would have beneficial effects in ADHD, particularly in patients
      with polymorphism(s) of the tacr1 gene.
    Finally, we have recently uncovered a potential role for nifedipine, a
      drug already in use as an antianginal and antihypertensive, in the
      treatment of ADHD, through its effect on L-type calcium channels [6].
    