CaseStudyId: 41798
Title: 
The impact of the Marmot Review on national and local policies to redress
social inequalities in health


ImpactDetails

The findings of the Marmot Review and subsequent work conducted through the Institute of Health
Equity (IHE) have contributed to the shaping of England's health policy. Health inequalities
are at the centre of the new health system in England. In December 2010, the government's White
Paper "Healthy Lives, Healthy People: Our strategy for public health in England" stated that it
"responds to Professor Sir Michael Marmot's Fair Society, Healthy Lives report and adopts its life
course framework for tackling the wider determinants of health" [a]. In 2011, the Department of
Health's Public Health Outcomes Framework set out the strategy for achieving this with the
intention to follow the Review's life course framework for tackling the wider social determinants of
health, stating that: "In improving the wider determinants of health, we have included a range of
indicators that reflect factors that can have a significant impact on our health and wellbeing. These
indicators are in line with those recommended by Sir Michael Marmot in his report Fair Society,
Healthy Lives in 2010, and focus on the "causes of the causes" of health inequalities. Wherever
possible, the indicators will follow the formulation published by the Marmot Review team and the
London Health Observatory" [b]. The principles set out in these documents were then followed by
inequalities duties - introduced for the first time by the Health and Social Care Act 2012. As part of
democratic scrutiny of these policies, members of the team have given oral and written evidence to
several Select Committees [c].
The Institute has worked with the Department of Health and other national and local bodies,
including NHS bodies and local government to help embed a social determinants approach to
health inequalities throughout the health system in England, including advising and influencing
national organisations such as the Department of Health, local authorities, Clinical Commissioning
Groups, health sector and public health professionals. The IHE's work has had measureable and
important impacts across England, including influencing national and local government, the NHS,
third and private sector organisations.
The shape of national health services has been influenced by our work. Public Health England
(PHE) was established in April 2013, bringing together specialists from more than 70 organisations
into a single public health service. The organisation reports that "the recommendations of the
[Marmot] report have informed the design of PHE in general, and the Health and Wellbeing
directorate in particular" [d].
Over 70% of local authorities are now working to embed `Marmot principles' in their approaches
to improving health and reducing inequalities [e]. For example, Coventry Council describe its
approach as follows:
"Coventry is a Marmot City, and the aim of the Health and Well-being Board is to improve
health and well-being levels in Coventry so they match the best in the Country. The Health
and Well-being Strategy is based around the six Marmot Themes which were identified in
February 2010 by Professor Michael Marmot in his report "Fair Society, Healthy Lives" (link
below). These themes identify the wider social determinants of ill-health and have been
adopted by the Coventry Health and Well-being Board" [f].
The Institute is engaged in a high profile programme of activity to encourage and support health
professionals to tackle health inequalities. The programme has been enthusiastically supported
by Royal Colleges, the British Medical Association (BMA) and other relevant organisations who
have provided many practical ideas for action and made commitments to embed them over the
next few years. For example, the Royal College of General Practitioners (RCGP) committed to:
"ensuring that health inequalities are taken into account across all areas of RCGP activity and
policy" and the Royal College of Nursing committed to "developing the workforce in terms of
emphasis on the awareness of public health and social determinants of health in pre and post
registration training" [g].
We have also been commissioned internationally to expand the impact of this work. The WHO
Regional Office for Europe commissioned us to lead a review to support the development and
implementation of the new common health policy framework for Europe: Health 2020. It was
carried out to answer demands from policy makers and public health advocates for practical
guidance on identifying "policies that work" to reduce the inequities in health1 between and within
low-, medium- and high-income European countries [h]. The European Commission awarded a
contract for IHE to lead a consortium to review progress made by its Member States in reducing
health inequalities action and recommend action by Governments and the EC [i]. IHE has
established international partnerships to support implementation of work on social determinants,
including a sub-network of WHO European Health Cities network [j]. IHE has also worked with the
Pan American Health Organisation (PAHO) to embed social determinants of health in its five year
strategy, as shown in its recent update to Health in the Americas [k].

ImpactSummary

In November 2008, Professor Sir Michael Marmot and his team at UCL were asked by the
Secretary of State for Health to chair an independent review to propose the most effective
evidence-based strategies for reducing health inequalities in England. The Marmot Review,
published in 2010, has fundamentally shifted discourse on health inequalities in the UK and
internationally. It has shaped public health services across England and around the world, guided
government and international policy, and has given rise to a new commitment from service
providers and health professionals to reducing health inequalities and addressing the social
determinants of health.

UnderpinningResearch

Research by Professor Michael Marmot and colleagues over the last 20 years has investigated the
role of social inequalities in health.
The Whitehall II study was established in 1985 by Marmot and his UCL team to investigate the
importance of social class for health by following a cohort of 10,308 working men and women.
Research on this cohort has continued throughout the period 1993-2013 with funding from the
MRC, British Heart Foundation and NIH, and to date over 500 research papers have been
published based on data collected from the study. The initial aims were to investigate the causes of
inequalities in disease during the working life, such as the inverse social gradient in cardiovascular
disease in Britain. In addition to the contribution of unhealthy behaviours and traditional risk factors
(such as high blood pressure) in heart disease and diabetes, the Whitehall II study showed the
importance of psychosocial factors such as work stress, unfairness, and work-family conflict to
socio-economic inequalities [1, 2].
Marmot was Chair of the Commission on Social Determinants of Health set up by the World Health
Organization in 2005 to support tackling the social causes of poor health and avoidable health
inequalities. The final report, entitled Closing the Gap in a Generation was published in 2008 [3].
At the request of the British Government, Marmot then chaired an independent review to propose
the most effective evidence-based strategies for reducing health inequalities in England. The
Review was tasked with identifying relevant evidence, showing how this could be translated into
policy, and advising on indicators and targets. The UCL secretariat team set up nine task groups in
topic areas relevant to the review (e.g. the built environment, early years, employment and work).
Each was made up of academic and practitioner experts in their area. The task groups produced
evidence-based reports and proposals for action. These reports provided a basis for the final
report, which was also informed by focus groups, consultation responses, policy dialogues and
meetings with professionals. The final report was therefore able to bring together and draw
conclusions from a wide range of up-to-date, expert research and data. Fair Society, Healthy Lives:
A Strategic Review of Health Inequalities in England Post-2010 was published in February 2010
[4] and had six main policy objectives, based around the social determinants of health:
A. Give every child the best start in life
B. Enable all children, young people and adults to maximise their capabilities and have control
over their lives
C. Create fair employment and good work for all
D. Ensure a healthy standard of living for all
E. Create and develop healthy and sustainable places and communities
F. Strengthen the role and impact of ill-health prevention.
Following publication there has been an intensive phase of supporting implementation of the
proposals at national and local level to ensure the review is built on and taken forward. In
November 2011, the UCL Institute of Health Equity (www.instituteofhealthequity.org) was launched
to support this phase. The new Institute is supported by the Department of Health, UCL and the
BMA. The team have carried out further research work to implement the findings of the Marmot
Review and have published on issues relating to the social determinants of health, continuing to
build the evidence base for practitioners and policy makers &#8212; for instance in relation to alcohol,
obesity and smoking, the early years, fuel poverty, cardiovascular disease (CVD), the impact of the
economic downturn, mental health, advice for local government, healthy hospitals, chronically
excluded groups [5].
