CaseStudyId: 41839
Title: 
    Redesigning children's growth charts
    

ImpactDetails

    Since their launch in the UK in 2009, the UK-WHO growth charts developed
      by Cole and others are now used universally. They were introduced in
      England in May 2009, in Wales and Scotland in January 2010 and in Northern
      Ireland in October 2010 [a]. The charts are available in two
      formats: A5 charts that are included in the personal child health record
      (PCHR) known as the "red book", and A4 professional charts (0-4 years,
      2-18 years, NICM). All new mothers receive a copy of the PCHR, [b]
      so that in 2012, for example, the PCHR was distributed to all parents of
      the 813,000 infants born in the four countries that year. The charts and
      their interpretation were also discussed in the government's Birth to
        Five book, produced by the Department of Health in 2009 and
      distributed free to all new parents in England until 2011; in Wales a
      bilingual edition is issued [c].
    The A4 professional charts are used in primary, secondary and tertiary
      care, and for the year to April 2013 the numbers sold by the publishers,
      Harlow Printing Limited, for each chart were as follows:
    
      0-4 years - 400,000 copies
      2-18 years - 287,000 copies
      NICM - 95,000 copies [d]

    
    These numbers are impressive, not only in terms of their size, but also
      because they show how rapidly the UK-WHO charts have superseded the
      previous British 1990 charts (amounting to 90% of total growth chart
      sales).
    As they enable practitioners to recognise the range of normal
      development, the UK-WHO charts are uniquely well designed to achieve UK
      government policy aims in relation to child health, namely with regard to
      early recognition of growth disorders and risk factors for obesity, as
      defined in the Healthy Child Programme [b, e]. In June 2013, the
      CPCM chart was released. This is a modification of the main school age
      chart for use in children with growth or nutritional problems. It extends
      to age 20 years and features a body mass index (BMI) chart; low and high
      lines to monitor unusually short, thin or overweight children; puberty
      phase specific thresholds to assess small children with late onset puberty
      and tall children with early onset puberty [f].
    The UK work has also had an impact internationally. For example, the 0-4
      years and NICM charts have been adapted for use in New Zealand [g],
      where they have been used since mid-2010. From January 2013, they have
      also been in use in Ireland [h], where all newborn infants are
      assessed using them. As an indication of reach, 72,000 babies were born in
      Ireland in 2012 [i].
    The guiding principles in the chart design were that the charts should be
      evidence-based, useful and easy to use &#8212; and hence more likely to be
      effective. Parents often claim to understand growth charts, yet they show
      only limited comprehension when tested [j]. Therefore the charts
      were developed with better layout than before, and with instructions for
      the PCHR and A4 charts targeted at their respective audiences, parents and
      professionals [k].
    The new and improved elements on the charts also benefit both parents and
      professionals. These include a reduced emphasis on the 50th
      centile, as sometimes parents expect all `normal' children to grow along
      the 50th centile line. On the new charts however, there are more centile
      labels and the curve labels sit on the 50th centile to assist orientation
      when plotting and interpreting [l]. A `dip' in weight between 2-4
      weeks is no longer seen, as the charts have more information on weight
      gain in the first few weeks, and they allow for the average tendency for
      infants to show a slower net weight gain up to age 2 weeks [l].
    The new adult height predictor tells parents how tall their child will
      be, a matter of endless interest. It also allows professionals to compare
      the prediction with the parents' heights, and hence detect a possible
      growth disorder. For this a graphical parent height comparator is
      provided, which improves on the British 1990 calculator by avoiding the
      need for any calculations.
    Child obesity is a considerable public health concern, and these charts
      provide better tools for assessing possible weight problems in children.
      In the past, BMI in children has been relatively little used as a
      screening tool, due to the need for calculation and a separate BMI chart.
      The new charts include a BMI look-up, which provides the BMI centile from
      the height and weight centiles, avoiding both BMI calculation and a BMI
      chart. This makes it easy to plot the child's BMI centile over time, and
      it is likely to considerably increase parental and professional awareness
      of a child's overweight, which parents are poor at recognising [m].
    
ImpactSummary

    Research at the UCL Institute of Child Health underpinned the update in
      2009 of children's growth charts, which allow for more accurate
      determination of a child's growth pattern and provide better tools for
      assessing possible weight problems in children. The new charts are now in
      universal use in the UK for children from birth to 18 years of age,
      including preterm babies. Having been quickly adopted, they now account
      for 90% of all growth chart sales. Modified versions of the charts are in
      use in Ireland and New Zealand. In the UK they are provided to all new
      parents as part of the Personal Child Health Record (PCHR) &#8212; known as the
      "red book". They are used in general practice, community paediatrics,
      general paediatrics and paediatric endocrinology. The most recent charts
      are for use in children with growth or nutritional problems.
    
UnderpinningResearch

    Until 2009, growth charts used in the UK were based on the British 1990
      reference. Following a recommendation by the English Department of Health
      (DH) Scientific Advisory Committee on Nutrition (SACN), they were replaced
      by new charts based on the World Health Organization (WHO) 2006 growth
      standard. These new UK-WHO charts were designed by a Growth Chart Expert
      Group commissioned through the Royal College of Paediatrics and Child
      Health (RCPCH), which included Professors Tim Cole and Gary Butler, and Dr
      Helen Bedford (all UCL Institute of Child Health). The Expert Group was
      chaired by Professor Charlotte Wright (Glasgow University), who is using
      her chart development work as a separate REF case study.
    The charts for 0 to 4 year olds, launched in May 2009, used WHO growth
      standard data from two weeks to four years, and reanalysed birth data from
      the British 1990 reference [1]. Further charts extending the age
      range to 18 years were launched in May 2012, based on the same British
      1990 reference as before but to an improved design. In addition more
      specialised "close monitoring" charts were developed for neonates and
      infants (NICM) and childhood and puberty (CPCM). They incorporate a series
      of innovative plotting aids devised by Professor Cole, who was thus
      responsible for the following features:
    
      Centiles for birth weight, length and head circumference for 23-42
        weeks of gestation constructed using Cole's LMS method [2, 3].
        For this Cole used the LMS method to update pre-existing birth centiles
        to augment the WHO growth standard (which lacked preterm data).
      A Body Mass Index (BMI) look-up that converts height centile and
        weight centile to a BMI centile [4]. Here Cole used the strong
        relation between centiles of weight, height and BMI to predict BMI
        centile. As a result, knowing centiles of weight and height, BMI centile
        can be predicted to reasonable accuracy without having to calculate or
        plot BMI on a centile chart.
      An adult height predictor, a nomogram to convert the child's current
        height centile (at any age) to a predicted adult height, adjusted for
        regression to the mean [5]. This was joint work with Wright, and
        a simplified version was included with the growth chart. As well as
        being popular with parents and children, the height prediction is used
        in conjunction with the parent height comparator (see below) to detect
        growth disorders.
      A parent height comparator, a nomogram to compare the child's height
        centile to the mid-parent height centile adjusted for regression to the
        mean. Again, in joint work with Wright, it provides a graphical method
        to calculate an improved version of mid-parent height that, with the
        height predictor (above), detects disordered growth where the two height
        estimates are discordant.
    
    Centiles for height and weight for three phases of puberty were
      constructed using the LMS method. This was joint work with Butler and
      Wright, where the five Tanner pubertal stages were rationalised into three
      pubertal phases, and reference centiles for height and weight were
      constructed for children in each of the three phases separately. Elements
      of these centiles were incorporated in the CPCM charts to monitor growth
      in delayed puberty.
    