CaseStudyId: 41842
Title: 
    Community intervention through women's groups improves maternal and
      newborn survival and health in low-resource settings
    

ImpactDetails

    As a result of the underpinning research described above, scale-up of
      participatory women's groups has begun in various parts of India. Our work
      has also begun to influence policy in other low and middle-income
      countries. The results of our meta-analysis influenced WHO's decision to
      develop a training module on the intervention for global dissemination.
    From 2008-13, UCL and Ekjut worked to scale up the intervention in the
      high-mortality eastern Indian states of Jharkhand and Odisha. In total,
      the project led to work with 4,676 women's groups across 17 districts in
      four states, covering a population of over two million people [a].
      In 2012, the Department of Health and Family Welfare in Jharkhand
      incorporated the intervention into the curriculum of the Accredited Social
      Health Activist, a cadre of community health volunteers working in the
      country's poorest areas, and rolled out the intervention across the state
      [b]. In 2013, the intervention was rolled out in the state of
      Odisha in a collaboration between the Departments of Health, Women and
      Child Development, and Rural Development, together with the UK Department
      for International Development (DFID). DFID India made the decision to
      promote the women's group intervention as a cost-effective strategy to
      improve maternal and newborn health and to test its application to other
      health issues, including maternal and child under-nutrition [c].
      The roll-out in Odisha covers a population of over one million women [d].
    The results of our work have received vast media coverage in India and
      internationally. An article in The Hindu in 2010 interviewed
      mothers who had benefited from the programme. One described the impact of
      the programme as follows: "Earlier, we didn't clean our hands before
        cooking and eating. We'd just leave the baby and go off to work. Now we
        clean and grow vegetables ourselves. We keep the water clean in the
        house. Women in the village help one another and sometimes pool money to
        transport someone to hospital for delivery and visits to the doctor."
      Another said: "Earlier, when a problem arose, we would pray. Now, I go
        to a doctor at the slightest problem. I ate spinach, fish and vegetables
        during and after my recent pregnancy. I breast-fed for six months from
        the first day" [e]. This story was also covered by the Guardian
      and Time, as well as on Indian national television [f].
      The New York Times also reported favourably on the publication of
      our first Mumbai trial, where the results were less successful, reflecting
      on the use of evidence in global policy and the political pressure to show
      only positive findings [g].
    In Malawi, the intervention has been adopted as a model for improving
      maternal and newborn health by the Ministry of Health, UNFPA and the
      Uchembere Network. Project team members participated in the development of
      the Government of Malawi's plan for community interventions, part of the
      Health Sector Strategic Plan (2011-6) and the Malawi Road Map for
      Accelerating the Reduction of Maternal and Neonatal Mortality [h].
      Further media coverage for MaiKhanda included an interview with Voice of
      America in June 2013 [i].
    Through the non-governmental organisation Women and Children First, we
      are supporting further uptake of the women's group intervention in
      Bangladesh, Malawi, Ethiopia and Uganda, using an implementation guide
      developed jointly with UCL, the Perinatal Care Project of the Diabetic
      Society of Bangladesh and Ekjut India [j]. The organisation aims
      to extend the thematic content of the women's groups model to test its
      effectiveness for addressing other maternal and child health issues,
      including family planning, prevention of mother to child transmission of
      HIV, and under- five's health and nutrition.
    In December 2012, Costello and Prost participated in a World Health
      Organisation (WHO) workshop to design a module on community mobilisation
      with women's groups for maternal and newborn health, which will supplement
      WHO's existing guidance on Caring for Newborns and Children in the
      Community [k]. The results of our meta-analysis were also
      presented to WHO in early 2013 and influenced their decision to develop a
      training module for community health workers intended for global
      dissemination; this will have an impact on developing country health
      systems around the world [l]. The meta-analysis results were also
      launched at a large event in the Houses of Parliament and at the Women
      Deliver International Conference, both in May 2013.
    
ImpactSummary

    UCL researchers and overseas partners have developed a successful
      community intervention to improve maternal and newborn health, which is
      now saving lives in India's poorest communities and is being taken up in
      other low- and middle-income countries. The intervention involves village
      women's groups working together to identify, prioritise and address common
      problems during and after pregnancy using local resources. The process was
      tested successfully in Nepal, led to a 45% reduction in newborn mortality
      in an award-winning trial in rural India, demonstrated an impact on
      maternal mortality in a meta-analysis of seven trials across four
      countries, and has already been scaled up to a population of over 1.5
      million in rural India's poorest communities.
    
UnderpinningResearch

    Nearly ninety-nine per cent of the world's maternal and newborn deaths
      occur in low- and middle- income countries. South Asian and African
      nations shoulder a substantial proportion of this burden.
    From 2000 to 2004, Professor Anthony Costello and Dr David Osrin at the
      UCL Institute for Global Health (IGH) worked with MIRA, an NGO in Nepal,
      to develop and test a community intervention, which involved women's
      groups in identifying, prioritising, and addressing common problems during
      the perinatal period using participatory methods. The intervention was
      tested in a large community cluster-randomised controlled trial (RCT) in
      Nepal, where it led to a 30% reduction in neonatal mortality [1].
      The intervention increased care-seeking during pregnancy and institutional
      deliveries, and was also linked to improved newborn care practices in the
      home.
    From 2005 to 2012, Costello and Osrin, along with Dr Tim Colbourn, Dr
      Edward Fottrell (both IGH) and Dr Audrey Prost (UCL Institute of Child
      Health) worked with partner organisations in India, Malawi, Nepal and
      Bangladesh to test the impact of the women's group intervention on
      maternal and newborn health in other under-served communities.
    In rural India, the trial of the women's group intervention led by our
      partner, Ekjut, resulted in a 45% reduction in newborn deaths over two
      years in rural, largely indigenous communities among the poorest in India
      [2]. Further research also found that, in this rural trial,
      mortality reduction was greatest among the poorest mothers, suggesting
      that women's groups can be an effective way of targeting inequalities [3].
      The intervention's evaluation won the Society for Clinical Trials' 2011 Trial
        of the Year award.
    The intervention was also tested in slum communities in Mumbai, India, in
      a project led by local organisation SNEHA (Society for Nutrition,
      Education &amp; Health Action) in collaboration with Osrin. In this
      setting, the effects were not as great as for the rural population. One
      reason for this was that newborn survival was already better than in the
      other settings in which groups were implemented [4].
    Research in Malawi has been ongoing since 2003, when the MaiMwana project
      was set-up by UCL researchers Sonia Lewycka and Mikey Rosato to test the
      effect of the women's group intervention in Africa for the first time. The
      results of the MaiMwana women's group intervention were impressive: a 74%
      reduction in maternal mortality, and a 41% reduction in newborn mortality
      [5]. In 2007 another less-intensive women's group intervention,
      MaiKhanda, was tested, also by cluster randomised trial, by UCL
      researchers Tim Colbourn and Bejoy Nambiar. MaiKhanda also achieved
      significant results: a 16% reduction in perinatal mortality (stillbirths
      and deaths in the first week of life) and a 23% reduction in newborn
      mortality in areas where the women's group intervention was combined with
      a health facility quality improvement intervention [6].
    The intervention did not have the same impact on mortality as observed in
      Nepal and rural India when applied to a population of around 500,000 in
      rural Bangladesh with partners BADAS-PCP between 2005 and 2007. This
      caused us to question why the intervention had been so successful in some
      settings but not in others and we concluded that population coverage of
      the intervention was likely to be key (i.e. the ratio of community women's
      group per population). We therefore decided to test the intervention at a
      higher population coverage, increasing the number of groups from a
      coverage of one per 1,400 to one per 300 population. The results showed
      that when delivered at this higher population coverage and with greater
      participation or pregnant women and women of reproductive age, the
      intervention reduced newborn mortality by more than one third and was
      highly cost-effective [7].
    In 2013, a meta-analysis led by Prost and Colbourn collated data from
      seven trials testing the impact of women's groups, and found that the
      intervention reduced maternal mortality by around a third, or, in trials
      where the groups had greater than 30% of pregnant women as members, by 55%
      [8]. This is the first time that a community intervention other
      than training Traditional Birth Attendants has demonstrated an impact on
      maternal mortality at a population level.
    Partner organisations:
    
      Ekjut, India: http://ekjutindia.org

      SNEHA, India: http://www.snehamumbai.org/

      MaiMwana Project, Malawi: http://www.maimwana.malawi.net/MaiMwana/Home.html

      Diabetic Association of Bangladesh: http://www.dab-bd.org/pcp.php

      MIRA, Nepal http://www.mira.org.np/mira/

      MaiKhanda, Malawi http://www.maikhandatrust.org/About_Us.html

    
    