CaseStudyId: 42140
Title: 
    Promoting environmental justice and social sustainability in the Congo
      Basin
    

ImpactDetails

    The Congo Basin, straddling six countries in Central Africa, is home to
      remarkable biodiversity, and the second largest rain forest in the world.
      It is also home to nearly 150 distinct ethnic groups, including many whose
      lifestyle and identity is closely tied to this forest. In recent decades,
      however, local forest people have lost control over their traditional
      areas as governments are encouraged to capitalise on the region's wealth
      of natural resources by renting out the rights to international companies
      and organisations. These logging, mining and plantation companies, and
      conservation organisations, obtain rights over local resources through
      central government, without any requirement to consult local people.
      Lewis's research has developed the protocols and tools to ensure that
      previously ignored indigenous and local forest people now have a say in
      the management of their local forest areas, their rights to their land and
      resources are formally recognised, they are able to protect their key
      resources from damage during industrial activities, and they can report
      illegal activity or damage to their resources to local and national
      authorities, based on operationalising the international legal concept of
      FPIC.
    As a result of research at UCL, two professional organisations for
        forestry companies in the Congo Basin have adopted FPIC principles for
        their members. Additionally, the Forest Stewardship Council (FSC),
      which offers the premier certification for sustainable forests worldwide,
      requires certified companies to adopt FPIC criteria in the region. Since
      April 2012, all companies harvesting FSC-certified wood sold worldwide,
      deriving from the 4 million square kilometres of the Congo Basin, are
      required to follow the FPIC process.
    Lewis and Freeman's work on FPIC resulted in a book [a] translated into
      French, three summary pamphlets in English, Portuguese and French, formal
      presentations at the United Nations, Swiss Ministry for Economic Affairs,
      ministerial meetings in France, FSC meetings in the Congo Basin, project
      reviews and presentations at Chatham House, and training sessions for
      forestry workers from at least 12 African and non-African countries
      through the Centre for Social Excellence [1].
    Reading the book persuaded professional organisations representing the
      tropical forestry industry in the Congo Basin (Association interafricaine
      des industries foresti&#232;res IFIA, representing over 300 companies, and
      L'Association Technique Internationale des Bois Tropicaux ATIBT, 260
      members) to adopt FPIC as the basis for establishing partnerships between
      the companies they represent and the people living in their concessions
      [2]. They signalled this by organising training sessions run by Lewis for
      40 staff working in the social aspects of forestry from 12 of their member
      companies through the Centre for Social Excellence, as described below
      [5], as well as sponsoring talks by Lewis for their members in September
      2008 and February 2009 [3].
    Despite pressure to reject FPIC from some quarters, regional guidelines
      for the application of FSC Principles and Criteria in the Congo Basin
      adopted FPIC as a central concept mediating relationships on 26 April 2012
      (FSC-STD-CB-01-2012-EN Congo Basin Regional Standard), as a result of
      Lewis' research [2]. This document lays out the FSC standard for all
      forests in the six countries of the region [4]. FSC Criterion 2.2, for
      example, states: 'Local communities with legal or customary tenure or use
      rights shall maintain control, to the extent necessary to protect their
      rights or resources, over forest operations unless they delegate control
      with free and informed consent to other agencies' (p. 23) and similar
      language is included in 3.1 (control of forest management by indigenous
      people, p. 26), and 3.4 (compensation for traditional knowledge, p. 32).
      By 15 July 2013, 10 FSC certificates covering over 4.4 million ha of
      forest had been issued [4].
    Recognising that there was a lack of local capacity to implement forestry
      based on FPIC with local communities, The Forest Trust sought funds
      amounting to &#8364;1.2 million to set up a specialist regional training
        centre for young graduates on how to implement the highest standards in
        social forestry. Based on his research which had shown the lacunae
      in forestry skills, Lewis planned and helped establish the Centre for
      Social Excellence (CSE) in 2008 &#8212; designing the curriculum based on the
      principles of research, purchasing the library and organising student
      selection processes &#8212; and has taught there bi-annually since 2008. The CSE
      provides a one-year theoretical and practical training for graduates from
      the Congo Basin to learn the social aspects of forestry, including FPIC,
      involving forest people in mapping and decision-making processes, conflict
      resolution, advanced communication skills, rural micro project management,
      etc. [5].
    The CSE recruits students from Gabon, Congo-Brazzaville, Democratic
      Republic of Congo, the Central African Republic and Cameroon. It also runs
      short courses for employees of forestry companies. By mid-2013 the CSE had
      40 current students or alumni [5], of whom all but two were employed in
      forestry orientated research, industrial and commercial forest sectors or
      in civil society organisations in the Congo Basin. Two-week short term
      training for full-time professionals was provided to almost 52 individuals
      from over 12 forestry companies and 4 NGOs [5].
    FPIC requires that forest communities are well informed about the issues
      facing their forest. With a low population density (&lt;1 person/km2),
      little infrastructure and small communities effective communication
      represents a real challenge. To develop an effective strategy to raise
        community awareness of these issues, Lewis supported TFT with a
      &#8364;700,000 Chirac Foundation grant in 2005 to set up Radio Biso na Biso, a
      community radio station for forest people. The radio station has been
      operational since June 2009 broadcasting exclusively in the 12 local
      languages spoken in the forest for 4-6 hours a day, with 20,000 known
      listeners, and an estimated 30,000 more outside the concession [6]. At
      least eighteen local people were trained in journalism and
      programme-making in 2008-2013 [9]. As of 2012, it is now fully financed by
      the forestry company on whose concession it is based, and is a sustainable
      and independently supported enterprise.
    This has had many benefits: Previously ignored local forest people now
      have a say in the management of their local forest areas, their rights to
      their land and resources are formally recognised, they are able to protect
      their key resources from damage during industrial activities, and they can
      report illegal activity or damage to their resources to local and national
      authorities. One advantage of the system appreciated by local people is
      that their maps do the talking for them, they can avoid going in person to
      negotiate in intimidating surroundings and in languages they often do not
      understand. In 2010, Lewis was awarded the Cuthbert Peek award by the
      Royal Geographical Society in recognition of the benefits to local
      communities of this unique approach [7]. Additionally the geo-tags enable
      local concerns to be easily and efficiently integrated into forest
      management planning which is organised in Geographic Information Systems
      (GIS). This simplicity led to the rapid adoption of this methodology (with
      many modifications) by every logging company seeking an FSC certificate in
      the Congo Basin. So far FSC has certified companies working in over 4
      million hectares of high conservation value forest of the Congo Basin [4].
      This exposure led some hunter-gatherers to request new software builds to
      document illegal poaching [e]. This has been developed and they are
      currently in the early stages of deploying the system in 2,800,000
      hectares of forest in northern Congo [e].
    The project attracted substantial media coverage which brought to global
      attention the research and how it helps to fulfil the need for forest
      peoples to be proactively involved in protecting their environment, for
      example [8]:
    - BBC News at Ten: GPS helps Pygmies defend forest. 30 January
      2008 ( averaging 4.9 million viewers);
    - New Scientist: `Interactive maps help Pygmies fight back', by
      Kat Austen. February 2012 (Global readership 764,371 per week).
    
ImpactSummary

    Dr Jerome Lewis's research defining how to implement free, prior and
      informed consent has led to effective and equitable relations between
      indigenous forest people and FSC-certified forestry companies operating in
      the Congo Basin (over 4 million ha). It enabled forest people to monitor
      illegal logging and improve forest governance and has been adopted by
      forestry organisations in the region. It was instrumental in setting up
      the Centre d'Excellence Social which recruits students from the region to
      train a new generation of forest managers with the skills required to put
      the newly defined social principles into practice, as well as Radio Biso
      na Biso, a community radio station which disseminates indigenous views on
      local issues, logging and conservation.
    
UnderpinningResearch

    Research at UCL Anthropology by Dr Jerome Lewis (lecturer at UCL since
      2007) seeks a better understanding of how to promote the application of
      free, prior and informed consent (FPIC) in the relations between local
      forest people and powerful third parties. He has worked in the Congo Basin
      with forest communities since 1993 and through regular research visits,
      notably to Congo-Brazzaville, gained unique insight into local culture and
      society, and the impact of national and global forces on forest peoples'
      lives and livelihoods. Since the late 1990s there has been an increasing
      international effort to regularise the application of the concept of FPIC
      to govern the relations between third parties seeking to exploit or
      otherwise impact on local peoples' land or resources.
    Together with Luke Freeman (lecturer in Anthropology at UCL since 2007)
      and Sophie Boreill (Anthroscape Ltd), between 2006 and 2008 Lewis visited
      some of the most advanced forestry companies in Democratic Republic of
      Congo, Republic of Congo and Gabon to identify effective practices they
      employed to develop partnerships with local people. Based on the
      observation of cultural differences between Northern conceptions of
      `consent' (a signature) and local ideas (a process of mutual
      satisfaction), following Lewis's arrival at UCL, he and his colleagues
      identified and drafted clear guidelines for implementing an FPIC approach
      to relations between powerful industrial companies and local people that
      would be meaningful for both parties [a, b]. This was used to define the
      steps required to apply FPIC in the context of forestry certification
      schemes [a]. To do so required the development of new engagement methods,
      organisational approaches, and specially adapted tools (both hard and
      software) to enable well-informed and fairer discussions to be possible
      between these different groups, and so that local forest people can
      accurately map their lands and resources, and monitor logging activities
      in their forest areas [c, d].
    Regularly returning to the forest for research means that Lewis maintains
      regular contact with local people. When visiting in 2008 to set up the
      community radio station Biso na Biso, local Mbendjele Pygmy
      hunters asked Lewis to develop a means for them to monitor illegal
      poachers so that government enforcement agents would be more effective at
      catching them. This led to the Extreme Citizen Science Research Group
      (ExCiteS), established in 2011 to develop the methodologies, technologies
      and theory to enable any community to set up its own ExCiteS project.
      Based in UCL's Department of Geomatic Engineering, Lewis co-directs the
      research group with Professor Muki Haklay. In 2012-13 ExCiteS successfully
      developed and trialled iconic software based on the Android operating
      system which can be uploaded onto cheap smartphones to enable non-literate
      people to collect information that scientifically describes and geo-tags
      their resources, or specific environmental problems that they are
      concerned about, such as resource damage during logging (Cameroon 2008 [c]
      and Congo 2013), or poaching (Congo 2012-3 [e]). Lewis developed the
      iconic language and a robust methodology for co-developing software and
      introducing these new technologies among forest peoples [c, e, f].
      Currently the project has begun to develop geographic information analytic
      tools (supported by ESRI) to enable non-literate people to benefit from
      the analytic power of GIS to support them in managing their local
      environment.
    