CaseStudyId: 42282
Title: 
    Engaging law enforcement and the public with the history of organised
        crime in Italy
    

ImpactDetails

    Dickie's research on the history of criminal organisations in Italy has
      had direct impacts on the training and practice of law enforcement and
      judicial professionals, and of civil society organisations in Italy. The
      work has also directly engaged wide public audiences both beyond and
      within Italy, both through its publication in accessible texts bought and
      read by a global non-specialist readership, and through its contribution
      to international media discourse about Italian mafia and the social and
      political implications of their operations.
    Since the mafias are distinguished from ordinary gangs by their
      historical continuity, understanding this history and how the
      organisations have changed &#8212; or not &#8212; is a prerequisite for successful
      anti-mafia work. The most powerful mafia in Italy today, the `ndrangheta,
      remains under-researched: for example, before Dickie's work, there was no
      adequate explanation of its origins. Moreover, since 1992, both Italy's
      police forces and its prosecutors have been organised in specialised
      anti-mafia teams, coordinated nationally. This new level of specialisation
      means that, unlike the past, it is now a regular occurrence for both
      police and magistrates to work on combatting different mafias in different
      phases of their careers, and to work on several mafias contemporaneously.
      Dickie's comparative research on mafia history provides a single
      historical narrative of all the mafias together that is adequate to this
      new, broader perspective.
    The use of Dickie's research as a resource for practitioners has
      ensured the considerable impacts of the research on professional
        understanding and practice among anti-mafia officials in Italy.
      However, the nature of Italian law enforcement, particularly in anti-mafia
      work, is such that much of this influence occurs through informal channels
      such as meetings, emails and telephone calls. The most dedicated
      magistrates and law enforcement officers take it upon themselves to read
      around the subject. Accordingly, law enforcement officials and judicial
      practitioners routinely refer either to Dickie himself and/or to the
      written outputs of his research in seeking to better understand these
      organisations' operation and evolution. As such, the research has made
      significant contributions to the professional preparation and development
      of law enforcement officers engaged in front-line work against the mafias.
      The unique comparative approach used by Dickie to contextualise and
      understand Italy's three principal mafia organisations sets his work apart
      from comparable books, ensuring its widespread use at all levels of the
      Italian law enforcement and judiciary services [1, 2].
    This use of research has supported the successful investigation and
        prosecutions of mafia members through its use to establish
      correlations between contemporary investigations and the history of mafia
      activities. Describing its general utility in this context, a magistrate
      involved in anti-mafia investigations, and with experience investigating
      both Sicilian and Calabrian organised crime, explains that: `[Dickie's]
      research has confirmed empirical data that has emerged from investigations
      I have carried out in Calabria' [1]. A Captain in the Carabinieri's ROS
      section (which specialises in organised crime and terrorism) with
      experience of front-line operations against both Cosa Nostra and the
      `ndrangheta similarly attests to his use of Dickie's work `to confirm
      dates or people involved in particular crimes' [2].
    A specific example of this occurred in 2010 by magistrates in Reggio
        Calabria to build a case by prosecuting the `ndrangheta as a whole under
        Italian mafia laws as part of `Operation Crimine', a national police
      operation that led to the arrest of some 300 suspected members. The
      assumption that the Calabrian mafia constituted only a loose collection of
      local gangs had previously meant that each `ndrangheta trial had to start
      from scratch by proving the existence of the particular local gang in
      question. This was a serious impediment to effective law enforcement.
      Operation Crimine sought to remedy this by providing the first evidence of
      the existence of a coordinating body known as the Crimine (the Crime).
      Dickie used both Mafia Brotherhoods and supplementary
      documentation communicated personally to the Assistant Chief Prosecutor of
      Reggio Calabria to demonstrate that the Crimine (or something very like
      it) may already have existed in the 1930s and is perhaps even as old as
      the `ndrangheta itself. This information was used, in the prosecutor's
      words, `to analyse the results of [police and judicial] investigations and
      to construct hypotheses based on that evidence which, particularly in
      relation to the complex project known as Crimine, have so far met with
      substantial confirmation in the rulings issued by a number of Italian
      judges in trials that have taken place in both Milan and Reggio Calabria'
      [3]. The trials resulting from Operation Crimine are still ongoing. Once
      the judicial process is complete, it is hoped that they will establish a
      precedent for recognising the `ndrangheta as a single, unified criminal
      association, allowing for collective prosecution under Italy's 1982
      anti-mafia law no. 416bis - a huge step forward that will parallel that
      achieved by the famous maxi-trial against Cosa Nostra in 1992.
    Dickie's expert research insights are widely and frequently used to inform
        understanding and practice within anti-mafia civil society organisations.
      These include the Sicilian organisation Addiopizzo, which takes a
      revolutionary approach to fighting the mafia by bringing together
      businesses that refuse to pay protection money to Cosa Nostra with
      consumers who want to make sure that the money they spend does not end in
      the mafia's coffers. The organisation's officers and volunteers use
      Dickie's work to better understand the history and operation of the mafias
      and thereby to enhance the services that they provide to both local
        communities and tourists. Addiopizzo Travel, for example, requires
      all of its trainees to read Cosa Nostra as preparation for
      delivery of organised tours of Palermo's `sites of memory' in relation to
      the mafia and the city's fight against it [4]. Dickie's books have also
      promoted Addiopizzo's work and objectives among a wider public audience:
      many non-Sicilian tourists have been introduced to Addiopizzo by reading Cosa
        Nostra in its various translations, and have become involved in its
      efforts as a result, including, for instance, by donating money and
      choosing hotels that do not pay protection. Addiopizzo uses Cosa
        Nostra to introduce young Sicilians to the history of the Mafia
      including, for example, a three-year project (2008 to 2010) sponsored by
      the Ministry of Education, in which Addiopizzo worked with secondary
      school students to research the history of the mafia in an effort to
      reduce its influence on day-to-day Sicilian society [4].
    The reach of the books' impacts on public engagement with and
        understanding of mafias is considerably enhanced by the fact that Cosa
        Nostra, Mafia Brotherhoods and Mafia Republic are
      written for non-specialist audiences, presenting both original and
      established research to a global audience in an accessible while still
      academically rigorous manner. As a Financial Times article (June
      2011) described the narrative of Mafia Brotherhoods, it `bowls
      along, powered by the sort of muscular prose one associates with great
      detective fiction' [5].
    The books' reach across international public readerships is suggested by
      the number of translations and sales. This is particularly so for Cosa
        Nostra, which has appeared in 21 languages plus Braille since
      publication in 2004; by Spring 2011 it had sold 750,000 copies worldwide.
      The book's yearly English language sales (excluding the US market) from
      2008 to 2011 exceeded 60,000, with sales peaking in 2008 (16,371) and 2011
      (16,465) [6]. The book's continued relevance to broad non-academic
      audiences is further demonstrated by renewed contracts for continued
      publication in countries including Holland, Spain, Norway, and Germany;
      and sales and translations have flourished in new markets such as Finland,
      China, Poland. Mafia Brotherhoods has likewise been widely
      translated into Dutch (2011), Italian (2012), Czech (2012), and Chinese
      (2013) and sold over 39,000 copies since 2011. Mafia Republic,
      published in the UK in May 2013, is already contracted for publication in
      the same territories. While contracts to produce single volumes combining
      the two books had been signed in Germany and the US [6]. Cosa Nostra's
      reach, moreover, extended well beyond casual readers: in June 2008, a
      filmed raid on a Russian mob boss's palatial villa in Rome found the book
      on his bedside table!
    However, the most significant channel for the broader impacts of the
      research on public engagement with the issues covered in Dickie's books is
      their coverage by media outlets around the world. Mafia Brotherhoods
      was subject to extensive media coverage surrounding its publication in
      2011, ensuring the communication of its key insights to a huge audience,
      including interviews on BBC Radio 5 Live's Up All Night (6m
      listeners per week) and Newstalk 106-108 FM (12% audience share in
      Dublin); and a major July 2011 book tour in Australia &#8212; where the
      `ndrangheta has long had a presence &#8212; including appearances on Late Night
      Live with Philip Adams (over 300k listeners) [7]. As recently as 2012, Cosa
        Nostra was the book club selection by the influential American
      pundit David Frum on the hugely popular Daily Beast website which receives
      18 million visitors per month. [8]
    Dickie's provision of expert advice to media professionals through
      informal consultations and organised events has also informed and
        enhanced media professionals' knowledge about &#8212; and thereby the accuracy
        of global media discourse on &#8212; mafias, which are often reported in
      sensationalist terms. Dickie's books frequently inform coverage of mafia
      stories by providing relevant historical and societal information. This is
      gleaned not only from use of the published work, but also through Dickie's
      presentations to media professionals of expert insights gained through his
      research. On 2 September 2009, for example, he drew on research later
      published in Mafia Brotherhoods and Mafia Republic to
      deliver an invited presentation on mafias and the media to some 150 news
      professionals at the annual conference of the European Broadcasting
      Union's radio news group in Turin. Media interest in his work recently
      extended to the production of two related television documentaries based
      on it: the first of these, Mafia Bunker, was transmitted on
      History Channel Italia in April 2013; the second, The Mafia's Secret
        Bunkers, aired on BBC2 on 1 May 2013. The latter, according to its
      Executive Producer, used Dickie's research not only as a credible source
      of support for the original commission, but to move `beyond an engaging
      current affairs piece into the most detailed and informative piece on the
      `Ndrangheta Mafia in Calabria that there has been on international
      television' [9]. It was watched by 1.23 million (5.27% audience share) and
      was recommended by the Telegraph, Daily Mail, the Times,
      Observer and the Sun. The Italian version pulled in 114,000
      viewers, doubling History Channel Italia's average audience, and also
      received positive advance notices in the Italian press [10].
    
ImpactSummary

    Research at UCL spread public understanding of mafias around the world,
      contributed to the professional preparation and development of law
      enforcement officers and investigating magistrates engaged in front-line
      work against the mafias, provided historical evidence supporting
      magistrates in Reggio Calabria seeking to create a legal precedent for the
      successful prosecution of the `ndrangheta under anti-mafia laws. It
      contributed to the memorialisation of victims of mafia violence in Sicily,
      aided the work of the anti-protection racket organisation Addiopizzo by
      influencing its staff and alerting visitors to Sicily to the importance of
      critical consumption in order to avoid involuntarily funding the mafia.
    
UnderpinningResearch

    Italy is unique in Western Europe in that it is plagued by sophisticated
      criminal organisations that have existed for around 150 years. The three
      major mafias &#8212; the well-known Cosa Nostra mafia of Sicily; `ndrangheta, a
      Calabrian mafia organisation believed to control a large proportion of the
      European Union's drug traffic who, in recent decades, have surpassed their
      better-known Sicilian counterparts in spread and earnings; and the
      camorra, their Neapolitan counterparts &#8212; constitute a major threat to
      Italy's stability and democracy. Understanding these organisations
      inevitably has implications far beyond academia.
    John Dickie (full-time researcher in UCL Italian since 1993; Professor of
      Italian Studies since 2009) has been researching these mafias in Sicily
      and Southern Italy since 2001, focusing particularly on examining their
      history and organisation as a means of better understanding how they have
      prospered for so long. His more recent (post-2007) work in this area is
      underpinned by an innovative comparative approach to the long history of
      the three mafias, and draws on documentation unearthed by him on important
      phases of their history. It particularly explores a new `unitary' approach
      to the `ndrangheta's history, which had long been believed to be a
      collection of gangs rather than an organised group. As with all
      `large-canvas' narrative history, Dickie's approach involves blending
      existing work with new research, often drawing on newly discovered sources
      to provide overarching narrative syntheses intended to be accessible to
      specialist and non-specialist academic, as well as to professionals and
      the general public.
    His 2004 monograph, Cosa Nostra [a, section 3], exemplifies this
      approach in its synthesis of the best academic work then extant in the new
      sub-discipline of Sicilian mafia history with recent insights from the
      judiciary, law enforcement and journalists, and localised areas of fresh
      research. Dickie drew on these myriad sources to produce an academic
      consensus around the history and evolution of the Sicilian mafia and to
      bring this specialist understanding to as wide an audience as possible.
    Work undertaken between 2007 and 2013 and supported by a Leverhulme
      fellowship (2009-11) led to the publication in 2011 and 2013 respectively
      of Mafia Brotherhoods [c] and Mafia Republic [d], a
      two-volume history of organised crime in Italy, from its origins to the
      present day. Inasmuch as they draw on existing research, these texts seek
      to reproduce for the other major criminal organisations (the camorra of
      Campania and Naples, and the `ndrangheta of Calabria) what Cosa Nostra
      does for the Sicilian mafia. However they rely much more heavily than did
      Cosa Nostra on first-hand research of archival and other sources.
      Dickie's comparative methodology allowed him to set out new theses in
      these texts on, among other things: the origins of the `ndrangheta; the
      transformation of its relationship to kinship groups; the persistence of
      coordination between its local cells; and the likely existence in the
      distant past of a coordinating body, known today as the Crime or Great
      Crime, and which has only just been discovered by law enforcement. The
      work particularly challenged a previous perception of the Calabrian mafia
      as a loose collection of local gangs.
    A short biography based on newly discovered sources of Ermanno Sangiorgi,
      a nineteenth-century police chief involved in mafia operations also
      emerged from this research project [b].
    