CaseStudyId: 42605
Title: 
    Applied research leading to the regulation of drip pricing
    

ImpactDetails

    The OFT estimates that UK consumers spent &#163;300 million on payment
      surcharges at the ten largest airlines during 2009 alone [1]. Upon
      receiving a super-complaint from Which? in March 2011, the OFT
      commissioned research into the advertising of prices, part of which was
      our experimental study as described in section 2. The experimental study
      [e] became the prime evidence for the OFT's new stance against drip
      pricing.
    On 2 December 2010, OFT announced that it had identified, based on
      `ground-breaking behavioural economics research' among other sources, that
      drip pricing, time-limited offers and baiting sales were pricing
      techniques with the potential to cause the greatest harm to consumers [2].
      It warned that: "On drip pricing, for example, businesses that ensure all
      compulsory charges are included in the headline price, and make details of
      all genuinely optional charges available at the early stages of the buying
      process are less likely to be subject to OFT enforcement action."
    On 28 June 2011, the OFT took action on this finding, specifically in the
      travel sector where abuse was felt to be most rampant. It announced that
      it had put passenger travel companies "on notice to change misleading
      debit and credit card surcharging practices or face enforcement action
      under consumer protection laws" [3].
    It further added: "Publishing its findings on these surcharges, following
      a super-complaint from Which?, the OFT also calls for the law to
      be updated to stop consumers being surcharged when buying goods and
      services with any debit card."
    As an immediate result, in July 2012, 12 major UK airlines (including
      Easyjet and Ryanair) announced that they would include debit card charges
      in their headline prices [4]. Thus, for instance, Ryanair announced that
      its &#163;6 per flight administrative fee would be included in advertised
      prices by August 2012, and in the website headline price by December. The
      popularity of this move may be gauged by the fact that the news article
      regarding this on the BBC website received 371 comments in a single day,
      the content of which demonstrated the extreme frustration drip pricing had
      caused consumers [4].
    At this time, the EU Consumer Rights Directive, which would ban
      businesses in many sectors, including the airline sector, from imposing
      above-cost surcharges on any form of payment, was due to be implemented
      from mid-2014. In December 2011, however, the UK government announced its
      intention of becoming the first European country to ban this practice by
      bringing forward its legislation. It cited the OFT recommendations based
      on research as underpinning this decision [5].
    In September-October 2012, the Department for Business, Innovation and
      Skills (BIS) held a consultation on bringing the ban forward. This was
      formally published on 18 January 2013 [6]. Meanwhile, on 18 December 2012,
      the Consumer Rights (Payment Surcharges) Regulations 2012 was laid before
      Parliament, and came into force from 6 April 2013 [7].
    The research and its wide coverage in the press [e.g. 8] also contributed
      to public debate on drip pricing and contributed important evidence to
      general public dissatisfaction with the practice. As suggested by the
      number of comments on the BBC news item described above, as well as the
      439 comments received at the government announcement of December 2011, the
      ban was immensely popular amongst UK consumers [9].
    The UCL research has begun to influence regulation in other countries,
      notably in the United States, where the Federal Trade Commission (FTC)
      held a conference on drip pricing in 2012 where the OFT's chief economist,
      Amelia Fletcher, presented the work [10]. As a result, in November 2012,
      the FTC issued a warning to 22 hotel operators to stop drip pricing in the
      United States [11].
    
ImpactSummary

    From the 1990s UCL Economics invested in the capacity to conduct
      fundamental and applied research in behavioural and experimental
      economics. This was the basis for the research which provided the evidence
      base for the Office of Fair Trading to identify and act upon misleading
      pricing practices, particularly `drip pricing', in 2010. As a result, 12
      major airlines announced that they would include debit card charges in
      their headline prices, and government announced that the EU-wide Consumer
      Rights Directive would be implemented a year earlier than it was due to go
      into effect.
    
UnderpinningResearch

    Experimental research on consumer decision-making builds on many years of
      academic and applied work carried out at UCL. In the late 1990s Ken
      Binmore (then Professor of Economics at UCL) started the dual strategy of
      conducting experiments for purely academic work as well as to inform
      real-world interventions at the Economic and Social Research
      Council-funded Economic Learning and Social Evolution (ELSE) centre, where
      often one informed the other. The most spectacular example of this was how
      auction theory and experiments carried out at UCL informed the design of
      the UK 3G auction in 2000, which raised an astonishing &#163;22.5bn and
      triggered much subsequent research into the design and conduct of auctions
      [a].
    With Steffen Huck joining UCL in 2002, the Department began to build a
      larger group in experimental and behavioural economics. In the area of
      consumer decision-making, the group generated a wide array of high-quality
      research. For example, in 2005 researchers examined the effects of
      different forms of feedback information on the performance of markets that
      suffer from moral hazard problems due to sequential exchange, and found
      that two-sided market transparency is an important ingredient for the
      design of well-functioning markets that are prone to moral hazard [b].
      Subsequent work estimated risk preferences using novel elicitation
      techniques [c], and explored the consequences of competition in the
      presence of behavioural biases [d]. These studies provided the academic
      foundation for capacity development in consumer policy questions.
    In parallel, the group developed the capacity for more applied work. For
      example, Huck and Brian Wallace developed experiments to inform Ofcom on
      issues such as price transparency of telephone calls or ease of switching
      telecom and internet providers. Huck also co-authored the first-ever
      behavioural/experimental study for the European Commission, an
      investigation into retail finance titled "Consumer decision making in
      retail financial services".
    In 2009, the Office of Fair Trading (OFT) commissioned UCL researchers
      and London Economics to investigate various ways of `framing' prices, and
      the impact on consumers. UCL's Huck and Wallace designed and carried out
      the study, and did the data analysis and interpretation, while London
      Economics provided administrative support and contributed to the policy
      implications. The study investigates six different ways of "framing"
      prices:
    
      Standard upfront per-unit pricing (serving as a baseline);
      Drip pricing where the consumers see only part of the full price
        upfront and price increments are dripped through the buying process'
      Sales in which a sale price is given and a pre-sale price is also
        given as a reference to the consumer, `was &#163;2 is now &#163;1' (actual prices
        are identical to the baseline treatment);
      Complex pricing where the unit price requires some computations, `3
        for the price of 2';
      Baiting in which sellers may promote a special price but there is only
        a limited number of goods actually available at that price;
      Time-limited offers where the special price is only available for a
        pre-defined short period of time.
    
    These frames were investigated in an experimental search market in the
      UCL experimental laboratory where 166 consumer subjects were endowed with
      a concave utility function and could buy multiple units of a good sold by
      two different sellers. There were search costs (travel costs) each time a
      consumer visited one of the two sellers. Each subject was confronted with
      the baseline and two of the other frames, and all possible combinations of
      frames were explored.
    The research showed that all frames had adverse effects on consumer
      behaviour and welfare, but identified drip pricing as, by far, the worst
      offender, followed by time-limited offers and baiting. Drip pricing wiped
      out 25% of consumer surplus relative to the baseline with straight per
      unit prices shown upfront. The study also examined in close detail the
      question of the external validity of its laboratory results, demonstrating
      that, if anything, drip pricing would be an even bigger problem in
      real-world shopping. The study was published as a working paper [e] and
      written up for a policy audience in an OFT report.
    In addition to Huck and Binmore, UCL researchers working in areas
      contributing to the consumer agenda included Syngjoo Choi (then Assistant
      Professor; now Associate Professor at UCL), Ran Spiegler (Professor at UCL
      since 2006) and Brian Wallace (Senior Research Fellow; at UCL since 2006).
    