CaseStudyId: 42642
Title: 
    Exhibiting South African photography and the African Archive
    

ImpactDetails

    The exhibitions Figures and Fictions and Distance and Desire
      described in section 2 deepened a wide international public's
      understanding of questions of race, identity and representation in the
      works of contemporary African photographers, as well as the rich
      historical holdings of SA photography at the Walther Collection.
    The reach of this is demonstrated by the large number and types
      of audiences attracted by the two exhibitions. F&amp;F was the
      first ambitious exhibition of contemporary SA photography in a major UK
      museum and, as described below, attracted large audiences (over 35,000)
      [1], generated multiple events and activities, affected museum exhibition,
      educational and outreach programming, prompted acquisitions and was the
      focus of public discussion and debate as well as extensive media
      attention. D&amp;D was the first exhibition in the US or Germany
      to bring together archival photographs of Africans with contemporary
      artists who critically engage with similar materials. It stimulated
      collaboration with a public museum, attracted a substantial audience
      (5,000 in New York, Ulm still ongoing) diverse educational events, an
      academic symposium, an expansion of a collection and huge critical
      attention in the USA and Germany (receiving more than 100 reviews in
      total) [2].
    The significance of the two exhibitions is demonstrated, most
      fundamentally, by the important role they played in bringing debates on
      identity and representation, particularly in African photography, to an
      international public. This not only exposed the general public to these
      issues, it also provided a pathway to broaden audiences at these cultural
      institutions. For F&amp;F, Garb worked in collaboration with the
      Black Heritage and Culture initiative at the V&amp;A to organise a series
      of evening tours and talks intended specifically to attract new
        publics to the museum and gallery setting. These included special
      tours and events for African/Caribbean women (a group of 30), attendees
      from ethnic minority backgrounds, and those interested in African art and
      culture [3]. For example, the Afropolitans event on 24 June 2011 took its
      cue from F&amp;F to offer over 500 attendees a free evening of
      music, workshops and performance celebrating African photography, fashion,
      and style, designed to introduce contemporary African culture and debates
      to UK audiences. The event received widespread coverage in
      African-interest blogs, such as MsAfropolitan and African Art
        in London [4]. Another special event, `Museums at Night &#8212; SA Figures
      &amp; Fictions' (13 May 2011) had about 700 visitors, of whom at least 40%
      were new to the V&amp;A (`with a strong South African presence') and
      feedback forms describe the show and related events as `inspirational'
      [3].
    The exhibitions also consolidated existing viewers and provided
        educational events for the general public and specialist audiences.
      F&amp;F was accompanied by three lunchtime lectures, an artist's
      panel and a two-day symposium entitled `Poetics and Politics of
      Photographic Depictions of People'. All were sold out, with 150 attendees
      each. There were also three curator-led walkabouts (50 attendees each). In
      New York, five gallery talks were held to accompany D&amp;D (all
      sold out, 50 attendees each) in addition to a 2-day symposium at New York
      University (NYU) entitled `Encounters with the African Archive' (175
      attendees) chaired by Garb. There were also class visits from NYU, Cooper
      Union and the Fashion Institute of Technology (20 students per group) [2].
      These events collectively exposed a wide range of attendees to SA and
      African photography and the critical debates around colonial and
      post-colonial representational practices that surround it.
    Through the enormous media coverage they generated, both shows raised
        awareness and critical discussion of African photography and related
        issues of race and representation beyond the gallery walls. Thus the
      reach of the events was extended to far wider audiences than those who
      visited the shows and related events. For F&amp;F, Garb
      collaborated on eight films for the V&amp;A TV channel with an estimated 4
      million viewers [1]. These were combined into an hour-long documentary
      which was shown, under a pre-existing agreement with British Airways, to
      passengers on long-haul flights over three months (although exact viewing
      figures are not available, about 3 million passengers a year have access
      to inflight entertainment on the airline) [1].
    The strong press response to both exhibitions demonstrates how vividly
      the research contributed to wider public debate on the issues explored by
      the research. Critical media discussion immediately engaged with the major
      themes of F&amp;F, bringing issues around pictorial genealogies,
      documentary, ethnographic and portrait traditions, and post-apartheid
      practices to public debate. Examples include [5] coverage in the Guardian
      (23/4/2011; 263k ABC print circulation, extended by the substantial web
      presence) Observer (17/4/2011; 303k circulation), and the Independent
        on Sunday (10/4/2011; 154k circulation). Several media outlets
      provided pictorial coverage, further extending the reach of the original
      exhibitions, including the British Journal of Photography (April
      2011), a 12-page spread in The Sunday Times Spectrum Mag (April
      2011). Coverage extended well beyond the UK; for example, the SA
      contemporary web-based art magazine Artthrob (6-8,000 visitors per
      month according to the website) reviewed it in depth [5]. TV and radio
      coverage was similarly broad, reaching a combined total of over 78 million
      people. Programmes included BBC 3 Nightwaves (11/4/2011; 2.25m listeners
      per week), BBC World Service, The Strand, (13/4/2013; 1.9m listeners per
      week), BBC World News (20/6/2011), BBC4 News, and BBC World Television
      (21/6/2011; 74m per week) [1]. This considerably extended the audience for
      the show and all programmes contained substantive discussion of works,
      photographers and themes connected to the show.
    D&amp;D had a similarly vast reach. The three New York exhibitions
      were widely reviewed in both the mainstream press and in publications
      targeting African American audiences. These included its selection as New
        York Times critics' pick (28/9/2012), and review (20/8/2012; 1.6m
      print and digital circulation according to the Audit Bureau of
      Circulations), New Yorker Photo Booth (March 2013) and the International
        Herald Tribune, (13/8/2012; 44.2m online readers) [6]. Special
      interest publications included reviews in the New York art and lifestyle Whitewall
      magazine and Another Africa (later reprinted in the Guardian)
      [6]. German press coverage included, for example, on TAZ.de (06/7/2013);
      Deutsche Welle (22/7/2013) and the C&amp; Platform for International Art
      from African Perspectives. Many of these engaged directly with the
      questions raised by Garb's research; TAZ pointed out, for example, that
      the `extraordinary research enabled the exhibition to showcase pictorial
      programs in ways that deconstructed the multiple strategies in which the
      West has imagined Africa' [7].
    Through extensive discussions and collaborations with colleagues in both
      the V&amp;A and the Walther Collection, Garb's research transformed the
      knowledge base of her curatorial, museum and academic partners, and impacted
        on museum/ collection programming. Working with her on F&amp;F
      enabled the V&amp;A to redress an imbalance in its exhibition programming
      which had not till then shown SA work in any depth [8]. This exhibition
      prompted the invitation to collaborate with the Walther Collection: Artur
      Walther invited her to curate D&amp;D after seeing F&amp;F
      [9]. D&amp;D was also accompanied by a closed scholar's forum,
      convened by Garb, for eight curators from the US, Europe and SA to discuss
      the Walther Collection works. These discussions culminated in the
      published catalogue [see above, b].
    Acquisition policy at both collaborating institutions was informed
      by the shows, reflecting a new awareness of the shifting geographies of
      art history and the impetus to extend collections beyond historic centres
      and especially in the direction of Africa, and contributing to
        national and international cultural heritage by ensuring that these
      works are recognised and made available to the public through important
      national and private collections. For example, the V&amp;A expanded its SA
      holdings and purchased 14 works first exhibited at F&amp;F [8].
      The Walther Collection, which was already dedicated to collecting African
      photography, acquired 20 contemporary works, 30 postcards and 8 albums
      under advice from Garb for display in D&amp;D and as part of its
      ongoing expansion of the collection [2].
    At both the V&amp;A and Walther Collection, the collaboration stimulated
        related exhibitions demonstrating its impact on an expanded interest in
        African work. Prompted by F&amp;F, in April-July 2011 the
      V&amp;A hosted a separate and parallel exhibition of 120 vintage prints by
      the SA photographer David Goldblatt, which were held in the collection but
      had not been shown since 1987 [10]. Garb advised on this show, which
      contributed new research and educational resources made publically
      available on the museum website, and through a micro-site dedicated to
      this photographer [10]. For the Goldblatt exhibition itself, Garb edited
      the wall texts, captions and pamphlets, bringing her research expertise to
      bear on contextualising Goldblatt's work. In Neu-Ulm, Germany, D&amp;D
      prompted the Walther Collection to collaborate with the Ulmer Museum on a
      related exhibition entitled `Woven Identities', making links between
      cultural artefacts and images and situating textiles from the museum in
      dialogue with photographs from the Walther Collection featuring related
      patterned fabrics [7]. To complement this, Garb provided a guided tour of
      D&amp;D for the curators of `Woven Identities' and convened a
      discussion of interrelated themes for curators and museum educators in Ulm
      in June 2013.
    
ImpactSummary

    Tamar Garb's curation of two thematically linked exhibition projects at
      the Victoria &amp; Albert Museum in London and a series of shows at the
      Walther Collection, along with related activities and publications, raised
      awareness of contemporary photography in southern Africa; brought African
      photographic history and related political/aesthetic issues to the
      attention of scholars and publics; impacted exhibition programming,
      acquisitions policies and educational activities of a museum and private
      collection; created new audiences for contemporary African and South
      African lens-based work; and offered cultural enrichment to a wide public
      audience.
    
UnderpinningResearch

    Tamar Garb's research has long been concerned with identity, race and
      representation, from the 19th century to the present. More recently, she
      has focused on contemporary South African (SA) art and photographic
      histories. She has explored the intersection of contemporary practices and
      historical genealogies, looked at the way that SA artists' engagement with
      archival materials informs contemporary work while providing historians
      with a filter through which to re-examine the past. Garb's interests in
      figural representation and body politics predate the focus on Africa
      (particularly in her feminist writing on French art and culture) but she
      has developed these themes in a number of projects dealing specifically
      with SA artists, including in 2007, the exhibition she curated (Reisemalheurs
      or Travel Woes: the work of Vivienne Koorland) at the Freud Museum,
      London. She edited the catalogue and wrote an essay on the references to
      European and SA history in Koorland's work in relation to Freud's ideas
      about travel and displacement [c]. In 2007 Garb published an essay on SA
      artist Berni Searle looking at her mobilisation of a local 19th- century
      folksong as a filter for surveying the politically vexed landscape of the
      Cape today. In 2008, Garb curated Home Lands/Land Marks at Haunch
      of Venison Gallery, London [d], in which she explored the imprint of
      historical events and traumas on contemporary landscape in South Africa,
      as evidenced in the extensive catalogue.
    In her 2011 exhibition at London's Victoria and Albert Museum (V&amp;A),
      titled Figures and Fictions: Contemporary South African Photography
      (F&amp;F) Garb built on these earlier explorations to examine how
      17 contemporary photographers negotiate dominant filters for depicting the
      figure: documentary &#8212; with its particular SA history in the
      anti-Apartheid movement; portraiture &#8212; manifest in the rich
      heritage of the African studio tradition; and ethnography &#8212; with
      its colonial and anthropological associations, showing how these form the
      basis for contemporary re-workings and critical engagement [a].
    Distance and Desire: Encounters with the African Archive (D&amp;D)
      at the Walther Collection in Neu- Ulm (2013-2015) was the culmination of a
      series of three smaller shows at the Walther Collection, New York
      (2012-2013). The Walther Collection has amassed one of the largest and
      most significant collections of African photography in the world. D&amp;D
      represents the first time that its historical work has gone on show and
      been the subject of sustained research and analysis. The
      exhibition/catalogue extends the dialogue of contemporary artists with
      earlier portraiture and ethnographic materials. It juxtaposes historical
      African photographs with recent work from Africa and the African diaspora
      produced by 20 contemporary lens-based artists. While both shows
      demonstrate the variety and critical acuity of contemporary practices &#8212;
      with their varied use of pastiche, parody, re-enactment, repetition,
      satire and homage &#8212; D&amp;D also seeks to complicate our
      understanding of the `African Archive' by showing early photographs in a
      variety of formats [b]. The aim here is to undermine monolithic
      interpretations of colonial photography, to take seriously its various
      mediations and material identities, and to allow for close looking and
      reading of individual bodies of work.
    Both projects [a, b] foreground the ethical and political questions
      raised by traditional representations of Africans by Europeans. They
      question the strategies artists from, in and of Africa use to confront and
      critique historical precedents. They seek to complicate formulaic readings
      of the `colonial gaze', opening up the possibility of criticality and
      curiosity both within the historical archive and in contemporary
      re-workings of it.
    Tamar Garb joined UCL as a Lecturer in 1989, becoming a Reader in 1995
      and Durning Lawrence Professor in 2001.
    