CaseStudyId: 43071
Title: 
    Bringing evidence-based practice to psychological therapy
    

ImpactDetails

    What works for whom? is a standard reference and teaching text for
      teaching in the area of psychological therapy, for postgraduate training
      programmes and academic courses, and for a broad range of professional
      groups both in the UK, North America, Australasia and increasingly in
      Europe. Beyond its direct teaching impact it has had a significant
      influence on clinical practice.
    In October 2008, the government launched a new programme, Improving
      Access to Psychological Therapies (IAPT) [a]. This was designed to
      ensure speedy access to evidence-based psychological therapies for
      depression and anxiety in adults (presentations which, taken together,
      represent the largest proportion of significant mental health problems in
      the UK population). The initiative to drive this project through
      government was led by Lord Layard, who specifically employed the evidence
      contained in WWFW to underpin his argument [b].
    In order to deliver the IAPT programme, it was necessary to train a large
      number of additional therapists capable of delivering evidence-based
      interventions to the same standard as had been practised by the research
      teams who had demonstrated their efficacy. Roth and Pilling were
      commissioned to develop a series of competence frameworks and National
      Occupational Standards for psychological therapies which would enable the
      workforce to be expanded in the necessary manner. They developed a
      methodology for anchoring the frameworks closely to the research base set
      out in WWFW, linking it to clinical skills for seven modalities of
      psychological therapy, as well as for psychological interventions in work
      with children and adolescents:
    
      CBT for depression and anxiety [c]

      Psychoanalytic/Psychodynamic therapy [d]

      Systemic therapy [e]

      Humanistic psychological therapies [f]

      Interpersonal Psychotherapy [g]

      Child and adolescent mental health services [h]

      Psychological interventions for people with psychosis and bipolar
        disorder [i]

      Psychological interventions for people with personality disorder [i]

    
    These frameworks have been used to develop national training curricula,
      making a critical contribution to closing the gap between the therapeutic
      technologies employed in research contexts and those implemented in
      `routine' NHS settings (`bench to bedside'). The National Occupational
      Standards for psychological therapies were published in 2010. These cover
      four modalities (cognitive and behavioural therapy,
      psychoanalytic/psychodynamic therapy, family and systemic therapy, and
      humanistic therapy). The competence frameworks constituted the `statements
      of evidence' on which the standards rested [j].
    By espousing and comprehensively explicating the principles of
      evidence-based practice as applied to the psychological therapies, WWFW
      acted as a driver of change, such that a commitment to evidence-based
      practice is now accepted as an organising principle of almost all
      professional training in psychological therapy in the UK. In the UK, this
      specifically includes training overseen by the British Psychological
      Society, the Royal College of Psychiatrists, and that accredited by the
      British Association of Counselling and Psychotherapy (BACP) and the United
      Kingdom Council for Psychotherapy (UKCP) [k].
    The IAPT programme represented a major strategic development within the
      NHS, and resulted in an increase in funding for services, availability of
      therapists, and the numbers of patients treated.
    Funding for services: During the period 2008-13, NHS funding for
      psychological therapies increased significantly, from &#163;161M in 2007/08 to
      &#163;389M in 2011/12. When expressed as a percentage of the total NHS adult
      mental health spend, this is a rise from 4.0% to 6.6% [a, p.38].
    Availability of therapists: Between 2008 and 2012 (the last date
      for which reliable figures are available), the IAPT programme trained, or
      was training, almost 4,000 therapists, the vast majority in specific
      techniques for which there is clear evidence of efficacy, with further
      expansion in training planned. Since training packages were developed in
      2010, more than 400 high-intensity therapists have been trained in the new
      modalities of therapy that have been approved to treat depression. A
      further 400 trainees were expected to be trained over the course of the
      present academic year (2012/13) [a, p17].
    Number of patients treated: After its first three full years, more
      than 1 million people used the new services, recovery rates were in excess
      of 45% and 45,000 people had moved off benefits. Norman Lamb, the minister
      of state for care services, noted: "There are strong indications that
        the IAPT initiative is beginning to not only make a difference to
        individuals and their families but also to realise economic gains in
        terms of anticipated savings to the NHS and welfare system alongside
        increased tax contributions." [a, p3]
    In 2011, IAPT expanded its remit to include interventions for children
      and adolescents with an &#163;8m/year investment for four years. Fonagy is the
      National Clinical Lead on this work. In February 2012, ministers agreed
      significant additional investment for 3 years [l]. The research
      led to the decision in July 2013 to extend the programme to 24 new sites,
      with services covering 54% of 0-19 year olds in England by the end of the
      year [m].
    
ImpactSummary

    Work by Fonagy and Roth at UCL to establish a firm evidence base for
      psychological therapies has had a profound impact on the delivery of
      services across the UK. This evidence was used to establish the Improving
      Access to Psychological Therapies programme. Building on the original
      research, Roth and Pilling developed a series of competence frameworks
      which have been used to train thousands of additional therapists to
      deliver the programme. More than a million patients have now benefitted
      from the programme, which, along with the clear impacts on individual
      wellbeing, has also been recognised as having significant economic gains,
      in terms of NHS savings, reduced welfare spending, and increased return to
      the workforce.
    
UnderpinningResearch

    The book What works for whom? A critical review of psychotherapy
        research (WWFW), co-authored by Anthony Roth (Professor of Clinical
      Psychology, UCL) and Peter Fonagy (Professor of Psychoanalysis, UCL) is
      now a cornerstone for policy and practice in psychological therapy in the
      UK and around the world.
    In 1993-4, Fonagy and Roth were commissioned by the Department of Health
      to conduct a review of the efficacy of psychological therapies as the
      evidential base for their policy review, "Strategic Review of
      Psychological Therapies." The aim was to assess psychological therapies
      across a broad spectrum of mental health disorders, and on this basis to
      recommend which ones should be part of standard provision in NHS mental
      health services, alongside pharmacological interventions. This review was
      published in 1996 [1].
    Developing this work further, Fonagy and Roth wrote the now-seminal book,
      What works for whom? A critical review of psychotherapy research.
      The first edition, published in 1996, was closely modelled on the earlier
      report [2]. A second edition was published in 2005. The book
      represented the first systematic and comprehensive review of all extant
      quantitative studies of the efficacy of psychological therapy in relation
      to the major diagnostic categories of mental health disorder. Its unique
      feature is the concise review and balanced evaluation of approximately
      2,000 clinical studies in the first edition, and 2,500 in the second,
      accompanied by explication of the clinical implications of this
      literature. It was the first definitive evaluation of psychological
      therapy studies, with a powerful and profound impact on treatment
      selection for the current generation of therapists, service managers,
      commissioners of services and (increasingly) patients.
    Some examples of conditions covered include: depression where the
      research found that there was clear evidence of the efficacy of Cognitive
      Behaviour Therapy (CBT) approaches and interpersonal psychotherapy, with
      limited evidence of efficacy for short-term structured psychodynamic
      psychotherapy; dysthymia, where the evidence suggested medication
      is the treatment of choice with little advantage conferred by the addition
      of psychological therapy; generalised anxiety disorder, where the
      review found strong evidence for the efficacy of CBT and Applied
      Relaxation; panic disorder, where three evidence-supported
      interventions were identified, Exposure Therapy, CBT and Panic Control
      Therapy; PTSD, where the review found trauma-specific CBT and Eye
      Movement Desensitisation and Reprocessing (EMDR) to be effective, along
      with emerging evidence to support the use of individual psychodynamic
      psychotherapy.
    Growing out of this work, Fonagy went on to develop What works for
        whom? A critical review of treatments for children and adolescents
      which was published in 2002 [3]. This evaluated the evidence for
      the full range of widely used child and adolescent mental health
      treatments, organised around the major presenting problems in child and
      adolescent practice.
    A major outgrowth from WWFW has been the acceptance that competence has
      to be linked to the evidence-base, and that this is best achieved by
      systematically disaggregating the content of manuals employed in research
      trials to guide therapists employed in demonstrating efficacy. A series of
      competence frameworks (described further in section 4) were commissioned
      from Roth and Professor Stephen Pilling (Professor of Clinical Psychology
      &amp; Clinical Effectiveness), funded by the English Department of Health
      or (in one case) NHS Education for Scotland.
    