CaseStudyId: 43122
Title: 
    Elucidating the genetics of deafness leads to better diagnosis and
      clinical services
    

ImpactDetails

    Genetic tests introduced into clinical practice. Our
      research discoveries have been translated into diagnostic tests for
      patients which are in routine use in the NHS. For example, in the year
      ending 2011, our NHS Genetics laboratory performed diagnostic tests for
      genetic deafness disorders in over 1,100 UK patients, and we provided both
      molecular and clinical input to reports. Nationally, in the same year,
      1,803 tests for GJB2 were carried out, according to an audit by the
      Clinical Molecular Genetics Society (CMGS) [a]. In 2012, a further
      gene dossier was approved by the UKGTN (UK Genetic Testing Network) for
      POU3F4 (X-linked deafness) [b]. We also obtained funding to
      establish massive parallel sequencing to underpin diagnosis in
      non-syndromic hearing loss and Usher syndrome, increasing the number of
      genes screened by almost tenfold. We expect this to improve the diagnostic
      yield by almost 100%, based on preliminary results and the work of others.
      The benefit to patients of this work is to clarify the inheritance and
      allow personalised genetic counselling.
    Establishment of genetic deafness clinics. We established
      the first dedicated genetic deafness clinic in the UK and the only
      multidisciplinary dual sensory impairment clinic [c]. We see over
      300 patients per year in these clinics for diagnosis and genetic
      counselling. One patient group we have worked with explained the impacts
      of this clinic on patients with Usher Syndrome as follows:
    "By attending the clinic, and sometimes engaging in the genetic
        research programmes, people with Usher have been seen by us to benefit
        by:
    
      Gaining full and reliable knowledge about Usher, and more
          especially which type of Usher they have...
      Gaining an understanding of the genetics of the condition. Some
          individuals have wrongly apportioned `blame' for their condition since
          they did not understand the genetics involved. Others use the
          information to work with family and siblings who may also have Usher.
          Most importantly the support allows people to make an informed
          decision about having their own families in future, or about having
          further children following a diagnosis in an existing child.
      Allowing planning for the future when understanding the Usher type
          and its possible prognosis. Decisions need to be made on support,
          communication, mobility and access to information.
      Learning about or taking part in the research into Usher allows
          individuals to think about the future and may result in positive
          feelings for the future.
      Mental health impact &#8212; people have indicated to us that they are
          relieved to learn more about their condition, to accept Usher and to
          move forward with a firm diagnosis and understanding.
      
Assisting families in their understanding of the condition, what
          the implications are and that they are not to `blame'" [d].
    
    Prenatal diagnosis. Human Fertilisation and Embryology
      Authority (HFEA) licences for Pre-implantation Genetic Diagnosis have been
      granted for two deafness conditions as a result of genes identified by our
      research [e]. This test is now in use in a number of centres as a
      result, allowing genetic counselling to take place.
    Best Practice Guidelines. Our research has contributed to,
      and has been quoted by best practice clinical guidelines issued by the
      British Association of Audiovestibular Physicians (BAAP) [f].
      Bitner-Glindzicz was a member of the working groups for three sets of
      guidelines: firstly, on Aetiological investigation into severe to
        profound permanent hearing loss in children, published in 2009,
      citing our work on Jervell and Lange-Nielsen Syndrome; secondly on Aetiological
Investigations
        into bilateral mild to moderate permanent hearing loss in children,
      published in 2009, citing our work recommending blood tests for Connexin
      26 mutations; thirdly on Medical Evaluation of children with permanent
        unilateral hearing loss. Our work is also cited in the BAAP's best
      practice guidelines on Investigating infants with congenital hearing
        loss identified through the newborn hearing screening. In 2013,
      Bitner-Glindzicz contributed to the European Molecular Genetics Quality
      Network (EMQN) Best Practice guidelines for diagnostic testing of
        mutations causing non-syndromic hearing impairment at the DFNB1 locus
      [g].
    Government Policy We advised the Department of Health Bill
      Team on amendments to Clause 14(4) of the Human Fertilization and
      Embryology Bill regarding embryo selection, particularly as it applied to
      deafness and the culturally Deaf community. Consequently the clause was
      re-worded to take account of the views of the Deaf Community [h].
      We contributed to NIHR National Horizon Scanning Centre document on
      `Genetic tests for screening pre-lingual hearing loss in newborns' for the
      National Institute for Health and Clinical Excellence (NICE) on the
      subject of potential advances in genetic technologies and their impact on
      screening newborns for deafness [i]. We were also invited to
      present our work to the All-Party Parliamentary Group in July 2012 at the
      House of Commons on the subject of Consent for Consent.
    Media and Public Engagement Our work on causes and
      prevalence of deafness among Bangladeshi children in East London was
      featured on BBC local radio. Our research findings on
      antibiotic-associated deafness were featured in the Independent, the Daily
      Telegraph and on the BBC website, raising public awareness of this
      potentially-preventable cause of hearing loss [j]. We have engaged
      the public and parent groups in this research and two patient groups are
      represented on the Steering Committee of one of our current programmes of
      research. Throughout our programme of research we have been involved in
      public debate with the culturally Deaf community regarding ethical issues;
      we have successfully engaged hard-to-reach groups in our research through
      Information Days and disseminated the subsequent findings through
      electronic media with the help of support groups such as deafblind charity
      Sense, who report that they "highly value the impact we believe
        Professor Bitner-Glindzicz's work has had on the Usher population in the
        UK and would very keenly wish this to continue" [d].
    
ImpactSummary

    Our research has had impact on the activities of practitioners and their
      services, health and welfare of patients, on society and on public policy.
      New diagnostic tests for genetic deafness have been introduced,
      and healthcare guidelines and professional standards adopted
      through our investigation of the aetiology of childhood-onset hearing
      loss. Disease prevention has been achieved by our research on
      antibiotic-associated deafness, public awareness of risk to health
      and hearing has been raised, and we have increased public engagement
      through debate on scientific and social issues. We have also influenced public
        policy on ethics of genetic testing for deafness with our research
      resulting in improved quality, accessibility and acceptability of
        genetic services among many hard-to-reach groups (deafblind,
      culturally Deaf, and the Bangladeshi population of East London).
    
UnderpinningResearch

    Since 1993, the UCL Institute of Child Health has conducted a research
      programme into the genetics of deafness, initially under the leadership of
      Professor Marcus Pembrey, Mothercare Professor of Clinical Genetics and
      Fetal Medicine, and subsequently under Professor Maria Bitner-Glindzicz,
      Professor of Clinical and Molecular Genetics. We have identified genes
      causing both syndromic and non-syndromic forms of deafness through the
      detailed study of families presenting to audiology and genetics
      departments at Great Ormond Street Hospital and recently to UCLP
      hospitals.
    In 1995, together with a group from the Department of Human Genetics,
      University Hospital Nijmegen, we identified POU3F4, the first gene
      for non-syndromic deafness in humans [1]. The programme continued
      with discovery of genes for Branchio-oto-renal syndrome [2],
      Cardio-Auditory Syndrome [3] and Usher syndrome [4]
      (deafness and progressive retinal degeneration) in 2000. We continued this
      work by examining functional effects of mutations in ion channel genes in
      an effort to understand why some mutations cause disease in the homozygous
      or heterozygous state [5].
    As well as laboratory-based studies we have also engaged in clinical
      research and genetic epidemiological studies. We contributed to a
      multi-centre study (led by Van Camp, University of Antwerp) [6] in
      which we studied the relationship between genotype and phenotype in GJB2,
      the commonest form of genetic deafness worldwide. This produced evidence
      of significant correlations, information that is used on a daily basis in
      genetic counselling clinics.
    Our discovery of the USH1C gene in one form of Usher syndrome led
      to one of the largest clinical and molecular cohort studies worldwide,
      improved and established diagnostic services for patients (including
      prenatal diagnosis). This finding established a specialised clinic for
      dual sensory impairment, and engaged this hard-to-reach group with
      multisensory impairment in ongoing research. Exhaustive genetic analysis
      has refuted digenic inheritance as an important contribution to this
      disease [7]. Clinical studies have documented visual acuity and
      field loss with age, prognostic information that is now used in
      counselling situations.
    Our work on an environmental cause of deafness, antibiotic-associated
      deafness, published in NEJM [8], has strengthened the case for
      genetic testing prior to aminoglycoside administration. This resulted in
      changes in clinical practice in situations where patients are likely to
      have prolonged exposure. It has attracted media attention and public
      interest and engagement of patient groups in further research. In addition
      it has catalysed links with industry for the development of bedside
      genetic testing.
    