CaseStudyId: 43121
Title: 
    Improved management of empyema in children
    

ImpactDetails

    Empyema is a complication of pneumonia which causes significant
      morbidity, with prolonged hospitalisations and multiple invasive
      procedures. The incidence of paediatric empyema has risen dramatically
      over the last decade, both in the UK and around the world [a].
    Prior to the research described above, significant variance in the
      management of paediatric empyema existed. Treatment was dependent on
      institutional and practitioner preference, with concern over both the
      state of the evidence base and a lack of standardised practice. This was
      acknowledged in the British Thoracic Society Guidelines for the Management
      of Pleural Infection in Children (2005) which said that "in the UK
        there is little consensus over management among respiratory
        paediatricians and thoracic surgeons" [b].
    Through the demonstration by Sonnappa and Jaffe of clinical equivalence
      between chest drain insertion with fibrinolytic instillation and
      video-assisted thoracoscopic surgery, a clinical consensus favouring the
      former has emerged. Supported by subsequent randomised trials in the US,
      chest drain use is now established in international guidelines as
      first-line management of empyema. Furthermore, it is now widely accepted
      that routine CT chest scanning should not be performed in the management
      of children with empyema, thus reducing exposure to harmful radiation.
    Impact on international guidelines
    The Thoracic Society of Australia and New Zealand reference our studies
      in their recommendations on: the use of daily X-rays, drainage of pleural
      fluid and use of VQ scans [c]. Clinical practice guidelines issued
      by the Pediatric Infectious Diseases Society and the Infectious Diseases
      Society of America on the management of community-acquired pneumonia in
      infants and children, referencing both our study and the subsequent US
      study, recommend: "Both chest thoracostomy tube drainage with the
        addition of fibrinolytic agents and VATS have been demonstrated to be
        effective methods of treatment. The choice of drainage procedure depends
        on local expertise" [d]. The Canadian Paediatric Society
      also refers to our research in their guidelines which state that "Although
        there is still ongoing controversy and a need for additional randomized
        trials, the best evidence suggests that either VATS, early thoracotomy
        or small-bore percutaneous chest tube placement with instillation of
        fibrinolytics (CTWF) results in the best outcomes as measured by
        hospital length of stay. CTWF may be the most cost-effective choice"
      [e].
    Impact on hospital practice
    Many hospitals in the UK and abroad have adopted our research finding in
      drafting their local guidelines for managing empyema in children.
      Guidelines from United Bristol Healthcare NHS Trust state that "Video-assisted
        thoracoscopic surgery (VATS) may be an appropriate alternative to
        thoracotomy. Early VATS, as a primary procedure, does not appear to
        offer benefit over a chest drain and urokinase, but is routinely used in
        some centres and in the US" [f].
    Furthermore, guidelines from the Children's Mercy City Hospital in
      Kansas, USA recommend that "Utilization of VATS or chest tube with
        fibrinolytic agents have been shown to decrease morbidity compared to
        chest tube alone with evidence suggests that treatment with VATS or
        chest tube plus fibrinolysis decreases the duration of fever and
        hospital length of stay" [g].
    Our study is also referenced in the Children's Health Clinical Guideline
      for Empyema provided by Auckland City Hospital, New Zealand [h].
    Benefits to patients
    This shift in practice has reduced exposure to the potential harms of
      general anaesthesia and invasive surgery along with the associated
      psychological stress to both paediatric patients and their parents/carers.
      Furthermore, the use of CT scans itself carries significant morbidity.
      Various studies have indicated an increased risk of cancer developing
      later in life for those who have undergone CT scanning. An Australian
      study, published in 2013, found that cancer incidence was increased by 24%
      in patients exposed to a CT scan when aged 0-19 years, compared with the
      incidence in the unexposed [i]. Thus our demonstration that
      routine CT scanning is clinically unnecessary means that through the use
      of plain chest X-rays and ultrasound scans for confirming a diagnosis of
      empyema, children are exposed to much lower doses of ionising radiation,
      reducing the risk of future malignancies.
    Economic benefits
    A 2008 US study used our data as the basis for their estimations of
      cost-effectiveness and concluded that "On the basis of the best
        available data, chest tube with instillation of fibrinolytics is the
        most cost-effective strategy for treating pediatric empyema" [j].
    
ImpactSummary

    The management of childhood pleural empyema has been standardised and
      improved as a direct result of research at the UCL Institute of Child
      Health (ICH). Pioneering trials demonstrated the clinical equivalence of
      chest drain insertion with fibrinolytic installation compared to
      video-assisted thoracoscopic surgery as a primary intervention. Chest
      X-ray and ultrasound scanning were shown to provide enough information and
      it was established that chest CT scanning had no role in the routine
      management of empyema. International guidelines have been modified to
      reflect this, reducing paediatric exposure to unnecessary general
      anaesthesia, invasive surgery and ionising radiation. Cost savings are
      estimated to be &#163;1.5 million/year in the UK alone.
    
UnderpinningResearch

    Empyema is a significant cause of childhood morbidity which occurs in 1
      in 150 children hospitalised with pneumonia. Many treatment options are
      available for the management of empyema, including antibiotics alone or in
      combination with thoracocentesis, chest-drain insertion, chest drain and
      fibrinolytics, mini-thoracotomy, open decortication, and video-assisted
      thoracoscopic surgery. However, treatment is not standardised and prior to
      our research, patient care was dependent on local practice and physician
      preference. Guidelines issued by the British Thoracic Society in 2005 on
      the management of pleural infection in children highlighted the lack of
      standardisation and the fact that there was little evidence to inform the
      best management approach.
    Between 2002 and 2008, Dr Samatha Sonnappa (Clinical Research Fellow,
      Portex Respiratory Unit) and Professor Adam Jaffe (then Senior Lecturer in
      Respiratory Research) conducted the first randomised study to
      prospectively compare two standard treatments. These were percutaneous
      chest drain insertion together with intrapleural urokinase instillation
      and primary video-assisted thoracoscopic surgery (VATS), which is a more
      invasive approach. The aim was to determine the primary intervention of
      choice by assessing the length of post-intervention hospital stay.
      Secondary end points were number of chest drain days, total hospital stay,
      failure rate, radiological outcome at six months and total treatment
      costs. The study revealed that there were no differences in clinical
      outcomes between intrapleural urokinase and primary VATS. There was no
      significant difference in the length of hospital stay after the
      intervention, the total length of hospital stay, failure rate or
      radiological outcome at six months post-intervention [1]. The
      study also showed that percutaneous chest drain insertion with
      intrapleural urokinase was cost saving, being approximately &#163;1,500 lower
      than primary VATS (&#163;6,084 vs &#163;7,586, p&lt; 0.001) [1].
    Furthermore, the research showed that chest CT scanning did provide
      additional clinically relevant information to chest ultrasound scans and
      chest X-rays, neither altering management decisions nor predicting
      clinical outcome. It was shown to have a limited role in complex,
      non-resolving cases or when other pathology was suspected, but the study
      demonstrated that it should not be used as routine [2] &#8212; a
      particularly relevant finding, given a number of recent studies which have
      raised concerns about potential cancer risk after exposure to radiation in
      childhood
    In further work, a retrospective review of V/Q scans of children
      originally recruited as part of the study, confirmed that these scans did
      not provide additional information to functional assessment in a
      clinically well child following empyema [3].
    