CaseStudyId: 43164
Title: 
    Parkinson's disease: new DNA diagnostics
    

ImpactDetails

    The research results described above represent a significant shift in
      understanding of a condition that for many years had been taught to
      medical students as the prime example of a non-genetic disease. As a
      result of our research, a new genetic test is now available to patients
      and their families. It is provided at 17 laboratories, both in the UK and
      internationally [a]. The practice is based on the data and methods
      first used by the UCL group (references [2] and [4] above). Therefore
      these findings have had a direct impact on the practice and implementation
      of this mutation test. This is the first time in Parkinson's disease that
      tests have been widely available and have been useful to a large number of
      potential sufferers. At our laboratory, affiliated with the National
      Hospital for Neurology and Neuroscience, we have conducted 760 tests in
      the period 2008-13 [b]. The UK Genetic Testing network approved an
      evaluation of the test for LKKR2 as a genetic test for the NHS Service
      Gene Dossier in 2011 [c].
    The test gives patients a precise diagnosis, and understanding of the
      risk of disease to relatives, with the possibility of pre-symptomatic
      testing in those at risk. Prenatal testing is also a possibility. To a
      lesser degree, an understanding of the mutation may help the prognosis of
      the disease [d]. One patient, Genia Brin (see more below),
      described the impact of the test results as follows:
      "When I got the results I thought `that's why'. There was some sense of
        relief to know there was a reason behind the illness" [e].
    Wood has been actively involved in raising public awareness of the
      genetic basis of Parkinson's disease, and his videos on YouTube have
      attracted hundreds of viewings [f].
    Many other research groups have built on our early work, and one area of
      particular interest is the identification of the specific relevance of the
      mutation to particular ethnic groups, for example Ashkenazi Jewish and
      North African Arab populations [g, h]. The link was highlighted in
      the Jewish Chronicle, Pittsburgh [i].
    The internet entrepreneur Sergey Brin blogged in 2008 about his
      experience of the LKKR2 mutation being discovered in his family, through
      his involvement with the genetic testing company 23andMe, saying "I
        carry the G2019S mutation and when my mother checked her account, she
        saw she carries it too...it is clear that I have a markedly higher
        chance of developing Parkinson's in my lifetime than the average
        person...research into LRRK2 looks intriguing (both for LRRK2 carriers
        and potentially for others). This leaves me in a rather unique position.
        I know early in my life something I am substantially predisposed to. I
        now have the opportunity to adjust my life to reduce those odds (e.g.
        there is evidence that exercise may be protective against Parkinson's).
        I also have the opportunity to perform and support research into this
        disease long before it may affect me. And, regardless of my own health
        it can help my family members as well as others." [j] LRRK2
      has become a priority area for the Michael J. Fox Foundation for
      Parkinson's research, which, together with the Brin Wojcicki Foundation,
      has invested more than $44 million in research projects in this area to
      June 2012 [k]. This high profile support has raised public
      awareness of the area, evidenced by press coverage [j].
    More broadly speaking, this work has had a wider impact on the rare
      diseases agenda. The identification of this mutation in a common disease
      provides a strong motivation for the recently announced rare disease
      initiative within the NIHR Rare Diseases Translational Research
      Collaboration [l]. It is highly likely that similar mutations or
      variants will be identified in other common diseases. The pathway to
      genetic implementation and diagnostics is now well established and will be
      followed by many of these other conditions using the paradigm described
      above.
    As a common mutation within the LRRK2 gene, it has also formed the
      mainstay of much of the biological exploration that has been carried out
      of the functioning of this gene and has also been a focus for many major
      pharmaceutical companies including GlaxoSmithKline (GSK) and Eisai. GSK
      and Eisai are well advanced in producing LRRK2 kinase inhibitors based on
      biological investigations of this mutation [m]. GSK reported the
      discovery and characterization of
      2-arylmethyloxy-5-subtitutent-N-arylbenzamides with potent LRRK2
      activities in 2012, and have been conducting an observational study to
      fully characterise the neurocognitive phenotype of Parkinson Disease
      patients with LRRK2 mutation since 2011 [n].
    There is widespread expectation that these molecules will be trialled in
      the at-risk population within the next 2-3 years. If successful this would
      provide the first disease-modifying treatments in Parkinson's disease and
      would be based firmly on knowledge of the biology and as direct result of
      the primary discoveries of the UCL group.
    
ImpactSummary

    Research into the genetic causes of Parkinson's disease by Professor Nick
      Wood's group at the UCL Department of Molecular Neuroscience, describing
      the mutations in the gene LRRK2, have led to the development of a new
      genetic test which is now available to patients and their families. This
      benefits them by providing a precise diagnosis, and an understanding of
      the risk of disease to relatives. The research has provided new insight
      into patterns of Parkinson's disease in particular ethnic groups, and
      given rise to improved public understanding and high profile philanthropy.
      This discovery has also opened up a new area of research into
      disease-modifying treatments in Parkinson's disease within the
      pharmaceutical industry, leading to new drug candidates.
    
UnderpinningResearch

    Until approximately 15 years ago, the cause of Parkinson's disease (PD)
      remained unknown. Since then there has been a huge improvement in our
      knowledge base. This has largely been driven by findings in genetics. In
      2004, researchers at the UCL Department of Molecular Neuroscience, led by
      Professor Nick Wood were an integral part of the group that first
      described mutations in the gene LRRK2 [1]. Within months of this
      finding a relatively large number of other reports demonstrated the
      numerical importance of this gene in the pathogenesis of Parkinson's
      disease.
    However, unique to CNS neurodegenerative disease was our discovery of the
      so-called common mutation (G2019S) in this gene. This finding in 2005,
      published in the Lancet, showed for the first time that a relatively rare
      variant could not only cause familial Parkinson's disease but also plays a
      very significant role in sporadic Parkinson's disease [2]. This
      finding has been confirmed by numerous groups worldwide and is the basis
      of a widely available genetic test for this common condition.
    For the test to be useful and implementable it was first important to not
      only provide a clinical phenotype description of the range of the disease
      features but also the penetrance. The UCL group undertook studies in this
      area, which were published in 2008 [3, 4]. Further studies by
      international colleagues went on to demonstrate that this mutation was
      hugely important in certain populations, in particular the Ashkenazi
      Jewish and North African Berber population. Here the mutation may account
      for up to one third of Parkinson's cases.
    Further genetic analyses [6] have shown that common genetic
      variation at the LRRK2 gene represents a commonly occurring risk factor
      for non-familial PD, providing further importance to understanding the
      role this gene plays in PD. Clinico-pathological studies have helped to
      broaden the phenotype of LRRK2-induced PD and improve diagnostic accuracy
      [5].
    