CaseStudyId: 43188
Title: 
    Comparative legislative analysis and House of Commons reform
    

ImpactDetails

    The House of Commons' Backbench Business Committee, established in 2010,
      is unique in
      comparative terms. With its eight-person membership restricted to
      backbench MPs, who are
      elected by their peers, and a chair elected in a secret ballot by all MPs
      across parties, the
      committee is responsible for scheduling `backbench business' (a new
      category since 2010) in the
      Commons for roughly half a day per week. MPs can bid to the committee for
      topics that they would
      like to see debated, and there is no involvement in this process by party
      leaders. The committee
      particularly encourages proposals that have cross-party support, and
      chooses topics that are
      topical, popular amongst MPs and unlikely to obtain a debate by other
      means. This process is
      widely seen as having promoted a more vibrant and independent House of
      Commons. The reform
      establishing the Committee stemmed from the research conducted by Dr
      Russell and described in
      section 2.
    When the MPs' expenses crisis broke in May 2009, Tony Wright, then the
      Chair of the Public
      Administration Committee, wrote to Gordon Brown proposing that a new
      committee should be
      established to look at options for House of Commons reform. His letter
      drew particular attention to
      the proposals in Russell's report [a], which had been published in 2007
      [1]. Wright had been one of
      the practitioner advisers to the research project, and had taken part in
      the report's launch at
      Westminster. The report had also been circulated to key individuals,
      including the Rt. Hon. Jack
      Straw MP and future Commons Speaker John Bercow MP. Consequently the
      Select Committee on
      Reform of the House of Commons was established, with Wright as chair. When
      it began its work, it
      appointed Dr Russell as its specialist adviser [2]. In its final report
      the committee endorsed the
      central recommendations in The House Rules?.
    One of the Wright Committee's key recommendations was to establish
      `backbench time' and a
      Backbench Business Committee. At that time, Dr Russell's report was the
      only one to make such a
      recommendation, and the arrangements proposed existed in no other
      parliament [3]. This was
      acknowledged in a report from the Backbench Business Committee itself,
      when describing its
      establishment:
    Drawing on research by the UCL Constitution Unit, the Wright Committee
      noted that the
      business committees which operated in other parliaments were often little
      more than an
      institutionalisation of the usual channels. They tended to provide a forum
      for the front
      benches of each party to communicate and were largely exclusive of
      backbenchers. The
      Wright Committee concluded that: Ministers should give up their role in
      the scheduling of
      any business except that which is exclusively Ministerial business,
      comprising Ministerial-sponsored legislation and associated motions, substantive non-legislative
      motions required
      in support of their policies and Ministerial statements. The rest of the
      business currently
      scheduled by Ministers&#8212;such as House domestic business, select committee
      reports and
      general and topical debates&#8212;is for backbenchers to propose and the House
      to decide
      (para. 3 in [3]).
    The committee explicitly rejected an `all-purpose' business committee on
      the basis of the evidence
      supplied in House Rules? [4], and the Backbench Business Committee
      and new category of
      backbench business &#8212; as outlined in the paragraph above &#8212; were closely
      based on the
      recommendations in the original report. Other recommendations from the
      Wright Committee were
      also in tune with Russell's proposals, such as those regarding the process
      for appointing members
      to select committees, but had also been made by other groups, whereas the
      proposal for the
      Backbench Business Committee had not.
    The creation of the new committee was controversial in some circles,
      particularly with party whips,
      who stood to lose control over part of the parliamentary agenda to
      backbenchers. But the reforms
      were debated and agreed in principle at the end of the 2005-10 parliament.
      They were then put in
      place at the start of the 2010 parliament, guided by the new Conservative
      Leader of the House of
      Commons, Sir George Young (who had also been an adviser to Russell's
      original project).
    The Committee came into existence in June 2010, and now schedules debates
      in the chamber
      regularly. Several of these have proved high profile, for example on
      Afghanistan, loan sharking and
      prisoners' voting rights. Others have been important but low profile, for
      example on parliamentary
      reform. None of these would have reached the parliamentary agenda under
      the old system,
      because whips could keep matters off the agenda that were uncomfortable
      for party leaders. The
      highest profile backbench debate of all was that on EU membership, on 24
      October 2011, when 81
      Conservative MPs defied the whip to vote in favour of a referendum [5].
    The existence of the Backbench Business Committee has been widely noted
      to have boosted the
      independence of the House of Commons, and been a healthy development for
      British democracy.
      The Wright Committee's report was described by the Times as `the
      most significant change to the
      way that the House operates in 30 years' [6]. Likewise, the House
        Magazine described the work of
      the new committee under the banner headline `parliament fights back',
      suggesting that it was `at
      the heart of the revitalisation of parliamentary democracy' [7]. Reviews
      of the Committee's
      operation by the House of Commons Procedure Committee [8] and Political
      and Constitutional
      Reform Committee have likewise judged it an important and positive
      development. For example,
      the review by the House of Commons Political and Constitutional Reform
      Committee reported on
      the operation of the Backbench Business Committee in July 2013. It quoted
      the Labour Shadow
      Leader of the House of Commons Angela Eagle's opinion that the new
      committee had become `a
      key avenue for Members wanting to give voice to public concern', and
      Graham Brady MP, chair of
      the Conservative 1922 committee, who noted that `there are debates that
      have been held that the
      Government would not have wished to hold, and that has opened up the
      process and has opened
      it up to public opinion far more' (p. 16 [9]).
    
ImpactSummary

    The House of Commons' Backbench Business Committee, established in 2010,
      is responsible for
      programming backbench business in the Commons for roughly half a day a
      week. Its
      establishment followed the key recommendations of a report by Dr Meg
      Russell, the principal
      researcher, and Akash Paun. The report proposed such a committee with the
      responsibility for the
      timing of backbench business. The recommendation derived from extensive
      research in four
      comparator countries. The new Committee has provided backbenchers with an
      assured voice in
      the business of the House, and opened the way for important debates that
      might not otherwise
      have taken place.
    
UnderpinningResearch

    In 2001-03, Dr Meg Russell, a member of the UCL Constitution Unit since
      1998 and Reader since
      2008, was seconded as an adviser to the Leader of the House of Commons,
      the late Rt. Hon.
      Robin Cook MP. She noted frustrations by MPs about their lack of control
      over the parliamentary
      timetable as well as suggestions from others that this problem might be
      alleviated through creation
      of a `business committee' for agreeing the parliamentary timetable,
      similar to that existing in other
      parliaments.
    At the end of the secondment, Russell sought to investigate the validity
      of these claims, with the
      aim of evaluating possible reforms. With funding from the Nuffield
      Foundation, she conducted a
      comparative study, looking at practice in four other parliaments (in
      Australia, New Zealand,
      Germany and Scotland) all of which have `business committees' of some
      kind. Research began in
      November 2004 and the final report was published in October 2007 [a].
      Russell was the principal
      investigator, supported by a research assistant, Akash Paun. He conducted
      desk research, using
      parliamentary papers and secondary sources from the countries concerned,
      and helped identify
      interviewees. Russell carried out study trips to the four parliaments,
      conducted over 60 interviews
      with parliamentarians and parliamentary staff, and was also responsible
      for drafting the report. The
      research focused on business committees, and more broadly on mechanisms by
      which
      parliaments may achieve autonomy from the political executive (e.g. by
      controlling the
      parliamentary timetable, appointments to committees, changes to
      parliamentary procedures, and
      choosing presiding officers or `Speakers').
    The central findings of The House Rules? [a] noted that, from a
      comparative perspective, the
      Commons had a number of features that facilitated parliamentary control of
      its own business. For
      example, the `independence of the Speaker, coupled with a culture where
      informal cross-party
      backbench work and even "cross voting" are common, is not found amongst
      any of the
      comparators' (p. 68) and `UK backbenchers have a whole raft of freedoms
      not available to their
      counterparts in New Zealand and Australia' (p. 68). However, the report
      noted that there was still
      pressure `to find a new logic of parliamentary control' (p. 68) and
      comparator parliaments offered
      insights into how control could be further extended. Specifically the
      reports proposed the
      establishment of a Backbench Business Committee and new category of
      backbench business (pp.
      72-7 and recommendations 3-13, p. 9), with the Committee determining the
      timetabling of House
      business. Notably, the report rejected a model of business committees in
      other parliaments that
      gave little control to backbench parliamentarians and were dominated by
      party leaders and whips.
    