CaseStudyId: 43398
Title: 
    Fungus research: impacts on pest control, heritage conservation and
      public
      awareness of science
    

ImpactDetails

    Commercial products
    Following the award of his PhD in 2001, Nicklin's student Pasco Avery
      continued to build on the
      work done with Nicklin at Birkbeck on whitefly control using Isaria
        fumosorosea. In particular, this
      has led to the licensing in the US of the biopesticide PFR-97TM
      (a commercial product formulation
      containing Isaria fumosorosea) for use on food crops. This product
      had for many years been
      licensed in Europe and Asia on a range of crops against whiteflies, thrips
      and other pests. Avery
      continued his work firstly at the United States Department of Agriculture
      Soil and Nutrition labs
      where other strains of this fungus were screened for their efficacy
      against pestiferous insects. As a
      post-doctoral researcher at Indian River Research and Education Centre,
      working closely with
      citrus growers, Avery continued his work on control methods against insect
      pests [a]. This led to
      the development of a tolerance residue limit exemption registration of
      PFR-97&#8482; in 2011 [b], as
      Avery's research was used to justify a request to waive tests against non
      target insect species.
      Certis USA began selling PFR-97 for use on food crops in July 2012 and the
      product is now
      increasingly used to protect the vine crop in California against mite
      infestations that have become
      resistant to many foliar chemical sprays [c]. This product is also
      being used there commercially
      against other pestiferous arthropod pests of economically important crops.
      Sales in the USA have
      been growing faster than anticipated and Certis has now sold over
      10,000lbs of the biopesticide for
      use on food and non-food crops. They are now planning to register PR-97
      for use on food crops in
      Mexico.
    Heritage consultation
    Nicklin has worked with a number of heritage organisations, including
      English Heritage and the
      National Trust, monitoring and advising on the presence and hazard of
      fungal species in air and on
      collections. In the first instance, the primary concern of this
      consultancy work is health and safety,
      so that when mould is discovered, Nicklin advises on what type of
      protective equipment must be
      worn by conservators. The National Trust's National Specialists
      Consultancy Manager reports that
      "[Nicklin's] work in identifying mould spores and preventing their
        growth is not just important, but
        utterly essential to the National Trust's continuing practical physical
        care of its historic collections &#8212;
        as well as to the Health &amp; Safety of its staff, volunteers and
        visitors" [d]. Nicklin has worked on
      properties including Windsor Castle, Coughton Court, Knole House,
      Christchurch College, Oxford
      and Dover Castle. This work has recently led to English Heritage and the
      National Trust jointly
      funding a PhD student.
    Nicklin also runs training sessions for both English Heritage and the
      National Trust. For the last
      four years, she has also taught on a course in Preventative Conservation
      run by West Dean
      college in Brighton. This is a continuous professional development course,
      which has been
      attended by professional conservators from a wide variety of institutions,
      including: English
      Heritage, the National Trust, Brighton Royal Pavilion, the Museum of
      Islamic Art in Qatar, the
      Tropenmuseum in Amsterdam, and many other local museums and galleries [e].
      The course aims
      to equip participants with an understanding of the `agents of
      deterioration' which affect the integrity
      of materials in collections, how to assess and prioritise those risks, and
      how to develop methods of
      mitigation which are appropriate in the context of each collection and its
      resources. Nicklin
      provided lectures and practical training sessions for the participants,
      enabling them to identify, risk
      assess and remediate mould infestations in their collections and
      libraries. One participant in 2013
      said: "In a nutshell, the course got us thinking about several issues
        surrounding conservation;
        sustainability in conservation, relative humidity and temperature,
        mould, pests, gaseous pollution,
        dust, light and lighting, emergency planning, objective setting,
        communicating conservation and the
        economics of preventive conservation (to name a few)" [f].
    Media/public engagement work.
    As a result of her expertise in mould and fungi, Nicklin was invited to
      become the consultant
      microbiologist for the fifth series of Channel 4's How Clean is your
        House? This programme was
      viewed by an average of 1.7m viewers per episode when it was first shown
      in August 2009, and
      has been repeated many times since then [g]. Nicklin analysed
      swabs taken from the houses and
      then worked on location to ensure that the scientific content of the
      programme was accurate. In an
      interview with the Birkbeck College newsletter, Nicklin described her role
      as follows: "I also made
        sure that they were getting the overall message right to the
        householder. We didn't want to terrify
        people. It's not car crash television. It's a sensible risk evaluation
        of the way some people live their
        lives. We were telling the householder, `this is a very hazardous way of
        living your life. Here are
        some simple ways to clean up.' When Aggie revealed the lab results on
        set I'd make sure the
        householder didn't get panicked, and to answer questions, so it's fairly
        responsible" [h].
    In December 2012, Nicklin appeared twice on BBC Radio Four's Broadcasting
        House to discuss
      microbes in the old BBC studios [i]. Nicklin sampled throughout
      the old studios, including that of
      the Radio Four Today programme, and returned to discuss her
      finding that only the fridge was a
      source of potentially lethal microbes.
    
ImpactSummary

    Research over the last 20 years by Jane Nicklin (n&#233;e Faull) and her
      research group has
      established expertise in fungi, which has led to impacts in three areas:
      impacts on the licensing of
      commercial products for the control of insect pests which affect food
      crops, which have led to a
      new product being licensed in the US to the benefit of vine growers;
      impacts on heritage
      conservation, where the work has benefitted English Heritage, the National
      Trust and many other
      conservation groups; and impacts on public awareness and media engagement
      with science, in
      particular through her work with Channel 4's How Clean is your House?
      in 2009.
    
UnderpinningResearch

    The research which underpins these impacts was undertaken by Jane Nicklin
      at Birkbeck,
      University of London. Her work has centred on the study of fungal
      biochemistry, physiology and
      molecular biology. This work has covered two main areas: (i) the use of
      fungi as biological control
      agents against insect pests, invasive weeds and nematodes; and (ii) the
      presence and hazards of
      fungal species in collections of historical artefacts, and resulting
      issues with indoor air quality.
    Crop plant losses due to pests, weeds and parasitic organisms remain one
      of the greatest threats
      to food security worldwide and remain stubbornly at over 30% despite the
      use of pesticides. The
      increasing use of monoculture and consequent decrease in crop diversity
      has exacerbated these
      problems; the bulk of our staple foods is provided by just fourteen
      species. Pesticide resistance is
      also an increasing problem. The use of micro-organisms as biological
      pesticides, in which the
      natural interactions between predator, prey and parasite host are used to
      control populations of
      unwanted organisms, is a key aspect of integrated pest management.
      Research in Nicklin's group
      over many years has focused on the development of fungi as biological
      control agents, exploiting
      the natural ability of many of these organisms to kill different types of
      parasite and pest. Work in
      the laboratory has focused at different times on fungi with activity
      against plant pathogens, insects
      and weeds, and now also nematodes.
    Nicklin and her co-workers studied the interactions of Trichoderma
      strains with plant pathogens
      and identified mechanisms of action that are vital to the interaction
      processes. These interactions
      can be mediated by secreted antimicrobial compounds, including toxins and
      enzymes, or as a
      competitor to pathogenic fungi. Preparations of this fungus were designed
      to optimise its growth
      and persistence on the target plant species, and its antagonism against
      the pathogens concerned
      [1, 2].
    Insects such as the white fly cause considerable economic losses, not
      just due to the loss of crop
      yield, but also as they can act as transmission agents for viral diseases
      of crop plants. Nicklin and
      her Ph.D. student Pasco Avery worked with collaborators at the Royal
      Botanic Gardens, Kew, to
      develop preparations of the fungus Isaria fumosorosea to control
      infestations of white fly
      (Trialeurodes vaporariorum) in laboratory and pot trials [3].
      Avery and his co-workers developed a
      novel bioassay to determine the horizontal transmission efficiency of
      Trinidadian strains of the
      fungus against simulated leaf infestations of Trialeurodes
        vaporariorum under optimum conditions.
      They showed that the fungal spores could colonize and destroy the white
      fly efficiently, and proved
      that colonization increased with the length of the light period
      (photophase) and decreased with
      distance from the target insects, suggesting that preparations of this
      fungus could usefully be
      commercialised as biopesticides [4]. They also suggested that this
      assay design would be useful in
      assessing the transmission efficiency of other fungi for commercial
      development as biopesticides.
    