CaseStudyId: 43686
Title: 
    Evaluating Freedom of Information
    

ImpactDetails

    The underpinning research strongly influenced the 2012 report of the
      Commons Justice Committee reviewing the operation of the FOI Act [see 1 in
      section 5], and the Ministry of Justice memorandum submitted to that
      review [2].
    House of Commons Justice Committee
    At its first evidence session on 21 February 2012 the Justice Committee
      invited Hazell, Worthy and Amos (all of UCL) to give evidence [3]. The
      research team also made three written submissions to the Commons Justice
      Committee, which were published by the Committee (Ev 126, 169, 194 [4]).
      They also gave private briefings for government ministers; senior
      officials responsible for FOI; and for the Information Commissioner and
      his staff.
    The Committee's report on the Freedom of Information Act, Post
        Legislative Scrutiny of the Freedom of Information Act 2000 (HC
      96-1, July 2012), makes over 40 references to the Constitution Unit's work
      [1]. Typical references include: `The question whether the Act had
      actually had an effect on public understanding of Government decision
      making was explored by the Constitution Unit in its major piece of
      research on whether the Act had achieved its objectives.' (para. 40); `The
      Constitution Unit ... found that public participation in decision-making
      had not been greatly improved in central Government because ...' (para.
      41).
    UCL research underpinned the Committee's conceptual approach. The
      Committee adopted the same analytical approach as the Constitution Unit's
      research, identifying the same two primary objectives and four secondary
      objectives for FOI &#8212; to increase transparency strengthen accountability
      for the former and to improve the quality of government decision making,
      increase public understanding of government, increase public participation
      and increase trust in government for the latter &#8212; (ch. 2 of [1],
      especially para. 11). Citing the Constitution Unit's evidence 13 times,
      the Committee came to the conclusions established by the research: the two
      primary objectives of greater transparency and accountability had been
      met, but the four secondary objectives had not (ch 2). On the secondary
      objectives of improving the quality of government decision-making, and
      increasing public understanding and public trust, the government cited the
      Constitution Unit research and agreed with the findings (paras. 206-215).
    The Committee found that the objective of increasing public trust and
        confidence in Government, Parliament and other public authorities
      may have been unrealistic because, as found following research by the
      Constitution Unit, the vast majority of people experience freedom of
      information through news stories and these are more likely to be negative
      in tone than otherwise. The Committee noted the Constitution Unit research
      as showing that the Act had had "no generalisable impact on trust" (para.
      35), as well as the media analysis which had shown that the press tends to
      use FOI stories to portray government in a negative light (paras. 35-37).
    The Justice Committee devoted a separate chapter of their report to the
        `chilling effect', the fear that FOI has damaged the quality of
      policy advice and of the public record. They adopted the Constitution
      Unit's definition of the chilling effect, and cited the research 15 times.
      In the core section of the chapter the research was reported in nine
      consecutive paragraphs, concluding:
    "The Constitution Unit's research on FOI is the first major piece of
      research of its kind and is a valuable contribution to the debate around
      FOI. In its consideration of the chilling effect, the Unit broadly
      concluded that the effect of FOI appeared negligible to marginal. We note
      this finding and have taken it into account in our deliberations" (para.
      190).
    The next two paragraphs cited contrary evidence from Sir Gus O'Donnell,
      but the report concluded that no legislative change was required.
    The Justice Committee also used the research when assessing the costs
        of FOI, at paras. 87 and 138. They drew upon the Unit's annual
      surveys of the costs to local authorities (para. 87); its surveys of
      requesters and their motivations (para. 41); and its finding that
      publication schemes do not work (paras. 20, 24-5).
    The Committee recognised the rigour of the research, relying as
      it did on over 150 interviews and five different research methods. Their
      report stated: "The largest body of research on the impact of FOI is the
      work carried out by the Constitution Unit between 2007 and 2009, looking
      at its effect on central Government, local government and Parliament. As
      the most important research-based source of evidence on FOI, it is worth
      considering in some detail. The Unit's research methods included:
      interviews with 56 officials in eight central Government departments, 90
      officials and others across 16 local authorities, 30 MPs, peers and
      officials at Westminster, as well as journalists, requesters and
      campaigners; an online survey of FOI requesters; analysis of press
      articles using FOI; analysis of FOI case law; and analysis of disclosure
      logs" (para. 182).
    Ministry of Justice Memorandum
    The Ministry of Justice Memorandum to the Commons Justice Committee (Dec
      2011) makes frequent references to the Constitution Unit's research, which
      is cited 12 times in the Memorandum itself, and 21 times in the Appendices
      [2] In the Memorandum's literature review the Unit's research is cited in
      half of all the footnotes (26 out of 56). The review opens by saying:
      "Much of the fieldwork in this topic area has been conducted by members of
      the Constitution Unit at University College London's Department of
      Political Science. Their research is methodologically robust, encompassing
      multiple methodologies including quantitative surveys of FOI requesters,
      officials and stakeholders; interviews with parliamentarians, civil
      servants and Information Tribunal members; analysis of media coverage; and
      analysis of Information Tribunal cases" (p. 82).
    Like the Justice Committee, the Memorandum adopted the UCL conceptual
        approach identifying the same objectives (transparency and
      accountability as primary and improving the quality of government decision
      making, increasing public understanding of government, increasing public
      participation and increasing trust in government as secondary (paras.
      195-218 and pp. 84-87, [2]). The Memorandum came to similar conclusions as
      the UCL research as to the extent to which these objectives had been
      achieved.
    On the question of trust, the Memorandum cites and endorses the
      following conclusion from UCL research: "FOI was oversold, by its
      advocates and by ministers, and labours under the burden of unrealistic
      objectives. To policy audiences we stress the need to lower expectations
      of what FOI can deliver; and explain that FOI is unlikely ever to increase
      trust, because the government's battle with the press over bad FOI stories
      is one that can never be won" (p. 87, [2]).
    Reach of the impact
    In advance of the 2012 review a number of senior politicians expressed
      strong concerns about the FOI Act, with Tony Blair and Jack Straw claiming
      that the Act had been a terrible mistake. They claimed it had stifled
      frank advice and open discussion within government. The research findings
      challenged this: there is very little evidence to substantiate the claim
      that FOI had a chilling effect. Much stronger causal factors were the fear
      of leaks, and changing administrative practices leading to poorer record
      keeping. The Committee balanced the Unit's evidence against the critics
      and concluded:
    "We are not able to conclude, with any certainty, that a chilling effect
      has resulted from the FOI Act ... the Constitution Unit's research, the
      most in-depth available, suggests it has only a marginal effect. ... Given
      the uncertainty of the evidence we do not recommend any major diminution
      of the openness created by the FOI Act" (paras. 200-201, [1]).
    Reach has been further extended by: a monthly series of Government
      Information Policy seminars, supported by government departments as
      subscribers, which ran from 1999 to 2010; an annual conference for FOI
      practitioners, FOI Live, which regularly attracted over 300 FOI
      practitioners; monthly FOI updates on the FOI pages of the Unit website;
      articles for local government and Whitehall journals; and frequent media
      appearances.
    
ImpactSummary

    The 2000 Freedom of Information Act was the subject of post-legislative
      scrutiny by the Ministry of Justice and the Commons Justice Committee in
      2011 and 2012. Both the Ministry and the Justice Committee drew heavily on
      work by Professor Robert Hazell and colleagues in the Constitution Unit at
      UCL. The Unit developed the conceptual approach to evaluate the impact of
      FOI, and provided much of the evidence base. The evidence contributed to
      the decision that, despite pressure from senior political and Whitehall
      figures, the Act would not be significantly amended.
    
UnderpinningResearch

    Between 2007 and 2011 Professor Robert Hazell (Director of the UCL
      Constitution Unit) led two ESRC research projects studying the impact of
      the Freedom of Information Act 2000:
    
      FOI and Whitehall (2007-2009), with Dr Ben Worthy (Research Associate)
        and Mark Glover (Research Assistant)
      FOI and Local Government (2009-2011), with Dr Worthy (Research
        Associate) and Gabrielle Bourke (Research Assistant).
    
    Mark Glover left UCL in July 2009, and Dr Worthy and Gabrielle Bourke
      left in June 2012, at the end of two further projects studying FOI and
      Parliament, and FOI and universities. In addition, Jim Amos was Honorary
      Senior Research Associate at the Constitution Unit (2000-2013).
    FOI is generally supposed to be a `good thing'. But why &#8212; what is it good
      for? The key conceptual contribution of the research was to analyse its
      objectives, and to develop a framework for evaluating its impact. Through
      analysis of White Papers, ministerial speeches and parliamentary debates,
      FOI was seen to have two primary aims: to increase transparency, and to
      strengthen accountability. It also had four secondary aims: to improve the
      quality of government decision-making; increase public understanding of
      government; and increase public participation, and trust in government.
    In examining the extent to which FOI had met its objectives, the research
      included 175 interviews: mainly with officials, but also with MPs, peers,
      journalists, FOI requesters and campaigners; an online survey of FOI
      requesters; analysis of press articles using FOI; analysis of case law;
      and analysis of public authorities' FOI disclosure logs.
    In both projects FOI was found to have delivered the first two objectives
      (transparency and accountability), but has not delivered the remaining
      four (references [a] and [b] in section 3). The amount of information
      released has significantly increased since the Act, and government is more
      open. FOI has been used by the media, MPs and campaigners to make
      government more accountable.
    But interviews with officials suggested FOI had not improved the quality
      of government decision-making. Nor had it increased public understanding,
      because few requesters use the Act to access policy papers, and the media
      rarely report policy disclosures. Public participation has not increased
      as a result of FOI, because less than 1% of the population make FOI
      requests. As for trust, newspaper reporting helps explain why FOI has not
      increased trust, because two thirds of the FOI press stories which we
      analysed were found likely to decrease trust.
    The research found no evidence that FOI had adversely affected the
      working of Whitehall, nor local government. Despite serious investigation
      there was no evidence of a `chilling effect', which might have taken three
      forms: reduction in the frankness of official advice; in the quality of
      the official record; and in the supply of information to government. The
      research concluded that when information is not properly recorded or
      shared, it is generally due to factors other than FOI, such as fear of
      leaks. The belief that FOI has a chilling effect is widespread, but there
      is little hard evidence of this effect ([a,] [c], [d] and [e] in Section
      3). The research findings thus challenged several powerful myths about
      FOI: some advanced by FOI advocates (that FOI increases public
      understanding and trust in government); some advanced by FOI critics (that
      FOI has had a chilling effect on policy advice and deliberation within
      government).
    In 2008-09 the Constitution Unit did a separate study for the Information
      Commissioner on policy advice which also covered the chilling effect. In
      2010 we did some limited work on the costs of FOI. And from 2006 to 2011
      we conducted an annual survey of FOI in local government, to assess the
      volume of requests and their cost. All this information helped to inform
      the Ministry of Justice, and the Commons Justice Committee when they
      embarked on their Post-Legislative Scrutiny of FOI in 2012.
    