CaseStudyId: 43687
Title: 
    UK Cabinet Manual: Codifying the process of government formation
    

ImpactDetails

    To resolve the three urgent matters identified by the research (how the
      Queen should appoint a Prime Minister in a hung Parliament; what powers
      could be exercised by the previous government; and how the civil service
      could support the process of government formation), the researchers
      suggested that a stronger set of guidelines should be developed in the
      form of a Cabinet Manual modelled on New Zealand's.
    Hazell provided copies of the New Zealand Cabinet Manual to the Cabinet
      Office. He also suggested to the Commons Justice Committee that they hold
      a quick inquiry into preparations for the next election. In February 2010,
      Hazell (UCL) and Peter Riddell (IfG) gave oral and written evidence to the
      Committee, demonstrating the inadequacy of existing Cabinet guidance,
      based on a comparison of the UK with Australia, Canada, Scotland and New
      Zealand [see 1 in section 5]. This was followed by the Cabinet Secretary
      Sir Gus O'Donnell announcing the preparation of a comprehensive Cabinet
      Manual, and publication of the key chapter on government formation before
      the 2010 general election [2]. Thus, only ten weeks after the 2009 report
      appeared, the Cabinet Office published Elections and Government
        Formation as a guide to the process of government formation.
    The specific contributions of the chapter published as Elections and
        Government Formation were: to provide essential guidance about the
      process of government formation in the event of a hung Parliament; to
      bring together in one place political and administrative guidance for the
      Cabinet, which the research had shown was non-existent, or fragmented and
      hard to find; and to codify for the first time the key constitutional
      conventions on appointing a Prime Minister. The Manual included two
      innovations which the Constitution Unit report proposed to the Cabinet
      Office: (1) an extension of the `caretaker convention' to restrict
      government decision-making in three different contexts: the run-up to the
      election, the period of government formation, and a mid-term loss of
      confidence (paras. 67-71 of the published Cabinet Manual [3]) and (2)
      provision of civil service support for the political parties negotiating
      after an election (paras. 51-53).
    Until the publication of Elections and Government Formation the
      process of appointing a new Prime Minister had been shrouded in mystery,
      leading to speculation that an uncertain election result would lead to
      chaos, or that the Queen herself might be required to choose. There was no
      agreed understanding that the previous government might continue in office
      until a new government was formed. There had also been nervousness in the
      financial markets about prolonged uncertainty following the election.
      Hazell (together with the Institute for Government) spoke at events in the
      City of London to explain what would happen, for example at the City
      Corporation on 11 March, and to the London Chamber of Commerce on 23
      March. Researchers also briefed the political parties on, among other
      topics, the constitutional rules of government formation, how the parties
      would need to negotiate and the caretaker convention.
    To enhance the accuracy of media coverage, Hazell spoke at four private
      briefings for broadcasters (two for the BBC, one at Millbank and one at TV
      Centre; one big meeting for all ITN and C4 news teams; one for Sky) and
      for the press and Foreign Press Association arranged in partnership with
      the Institute of Government. In the run up to the election Hazell also
      gave 15 interviews to UK and foreign broadcasters. During the `Five Days
      in May' he was part of the BBC and ITV election coverage teams, and gave
      over 25 broadcast interviews to explain the process of government
      formation in a hung Parliament (eg for ITN on 6 and 7 May; BBC TV News and
      BBC Politics Show on 8 and 9 May) [4].
    These activities to promote research impact were supplemented by
      activities of broader public engagement. On 9 May 2010 Hazell published
      `Keep calm and carry on talking: Whitehall has been preparing for this for
      months' in The Sunday Times. He also provided a YouTube
      mini-lecture, `A Hung Parliament Explained' (10 Mar 2010), which at the
      time of this submission has been viewed more than 97,000 times [5].
    The `Five Days in May' went smoothly. That was not a foregone conclusion.
      But partly thanks to Constitution Unit briefings, none of the papers
      declared that Cameron had `won' the election, nor did they whip up panic
      amongst the public. The civil service supported the negotiations between
      the parties, for the first time ever; the old government remained in
      office for five days during the coalition negotiations; the Queen was not
      drawn in until it was clear who could command confidence in the new
      Parliament; the markets remained calm. The wider beneficiaries were the UK
      electorate, who observed an orderly transition and formation of the first
      coalition government in 60 years. As the Guardian observed in an
      editorial titled `In Praise of the Constitution Unit' on 23 July 2010:
    Its report last year on minority parliaments shaped the Cabinet
      Secretary's thinking, and so helped lead to this spring's unexpectedly
      smooth transition to the coalition [6].
    Following the formation of the government, the Cabinet Office began
      preparing a complete Cabinet Manual explicitly modelled on the New Zealand
      example, as recommended by UCL researchers. A consultation draft was
      published in December 2010, and the first full Cabinet Manual was produced
      in October 2011 [3].
    Once again, Robert Hazell was consulted by the Cabinet Office on
      successive drafts of the Manual during 2010, and had several meetings with
      Sir Gus O'Donnell to discuss the drafts. When the work in Whitehall was
      going slowly, UCL's Dr Ben Yong, an expert on the New Zealand Cabinet
      Manual, was seconded to them for six months (March-September 2010). Hazell
      and Yong were twice invited to give evidence to the Political and
      Constitutional Reform Committee [7], and to take part in a private seminar
      of the Commons Public Administration Committee in March 2011.
    At these events, the researchers explained to Committee members the
      significance of the Cabinet Manual, and sought to allay their fears that
      it was wrong for the Executive to offer its own interpretation of
      constitutional conventions, as well as successfully challenging specific
      statements in the draft that contravened constitutional principles. For
      example, the draft suggested "whichever party has won the most votes and
      the most seats, if not an absolute majority, has the first right to seek
      to govern, either on its own or by reaching out to other parties". Hazell
      pointed out this was wrong: the constitutional principle was that the
      Queen should appoint as Prime Minister the person who commanded the
      confidence of Parliament (who need not necessarily be the leader of the
      largest party). As acknowledged in the committee's report, the offending
      passage was deleted on this recommendation [8].
    As a result, as of October 2011, the UK has a published Cabinet Manual
      which lays out clearly the main laws and processes that govern the conduct
      and operation of the government, and of government formation. In summer
      2013, the new Cabinet Secretary consulted Hazell about Cabinet Office
      preparations for the next election, and the BBC started consulting him
      about its election coverage.
    
ImpactSummary

    Before the UK's 2010 election there were widespread fears that a hung
      Parliament might lead to political and economic chaos. Research conducted
      and published by the UCL Constitution Unit showed both the necessity for a
      Cabinet Manual to guide the process of forming a new government in the
      event of a hung Parliament, and examined the best models available.
      Although the full Cabinet Manual was published in 2011, the Cabinet Office
      published a key chapter (Elections and Government Formation) before
      the 2010 general election. The chapter, which drew heavily on the insights
      of and recommendations made in the UCL research, helped ensure in May 2010
      an orderly transition to government of the first coalition in 60 years.
      That transition was also supported by the researchers' use of their
      findings to enhance understanding among professional, media and public
      audiences of what would happen in the event of a hung parliament.
    
UnderpinningResearch

    The Constitution Unit at the UCL School of Public Policy has a long
      history of research on government in non-majoritarian systems. Between
      2000 and 2003, Professor Robert Hazell (Director of the UCL Constitution
      Unit) and Ben Seyd, Senior Research Fellow at UCL (1997-2005), led a
      comparative research project, funded by the Nuffield Foundation, that
      analysed coalition governments in Denmark, Germany, Ireland and New
      Zealand to provide findings intended to inform the process of coalition
      formation in Scotland, Wales and Northern Ireland. This line of research
      was revived in 2009 with the prospect of a hung Parliament in Westminster.
    The central finding of the 2009 research was the need for a Cabinet
      Manual to provide guidance in the event of a hung parliament. In line with
      the Unit's commitment to impact through collaborative research, the
      project leader Robert Hazell (with Ben Yong and Mark Chalmers at UCL)
      worked alongside Akash Paun and Catherine Haddon at the Institute for
      Government (IfG). The research looked at minority and coalition government
      in Westminster systems, working closely with the Cabinet Office and
      Buckingham Palace. The research &#8212; involving 60 interviews with ministers,
      politicians, civil servants and experts &#8212; established that recent
      experience in Canada, with its unstable minority governments and
      constitutional crises, supported a widely held view in Westminster that
      minority governments are weak, unstable and short-term in approach to
      policy. In New Zealand and Scotland, however, minority governments were
      shown to be much more effective, offering lessons on how to facilitate a
      stable transition. Yong worked on the analysis of the New Zealand
      experience, and Chalmers on the Canadian, while Paun and Haddon worked on
      Scotland and the Lib-Lab Pact in 1977-78. Hazell wrote the concluding
      chapters, on the lessons for Westminster and Whitehall.
    The report ([a] in section 3) was jointly published by the Constitution
      Unit and Institute for Government, with five out of the seven chapters
      written by Hazell, Yong and Chalmers from UCL. The main findings were: (1)
      Westminster and Whitehall were unprepared for a hung Parliament; (2) the
      media had very little understanding of the conventions guiding the process
      of government formation; and (3) guidance needed to be issued before the
      election. The report identified three matters which required urgent
      clarification: how the Queen should appoint a Prime Minister in a hung
      Parliament; what powers could still be exercised by the previous
      government on a caretaker basis; and how the civil service could better
      support the process of government formation. It was suggested that a
      stronger set of guidelines needed development, in the form of a Cabinet
      Manual modelled on New Zealand's.
    To ensure impact, the Cabinet Office and the Queen's private secretary
      were shown a draft of the report in October 2009, and Hazell chaired the
      UK group at a Ditchley conference in November on Managing the
        Machinery of Government in Periods of Change [c]. In December,
      Cabinet Office, Ministry of Justice and Palace officials attended the
      launch of the report. Its conclusions were summarised in an article in the
      Political Quarterly a month before the 2010 election [b],
      accompanied by comment pieces from Lord Turnbull (former Cabinet
      Secretary), Sir Alan Beith MP (Chair, Commons Justice Committee), Paul
      Evans (senior House of Commons clerk) and Michael Crick (then Political
      Editor, BBC Newsnight).
    