CaseStudyId: 43701
Title: 
    Treatment of patients with Hodgkin lymphoma not responding to
      conventional dose therapy
    

ImpactDetails

    Our research since 1993 has developed new treatments for HL and has
      improved outcomes for patients who do not respond to conventional therapy.
      Firstly, we demonstrated the advantages of autologous stem cell
      transplantation, then refined this technique by establishing the correct
      dose range for the infused stem cells. Secondly, for the subset of these
      patients who subsequently relapsed after autologous stem cell
      transplantation, we pioneered allogenic stem cell transplantation to
      exploit the graft versus tumour effect of foreign stem cells. In
      particular, we developed reduced intensity allogenic transplants (RITs),
      which are less toxic than standard allogenic transplants, and which could
      be boosted by additional infusion of donor cells once the graft was
      established.
    High dose therapy and autologous transplantation, as developed at UCL,
      are currently the standard treatment for relapsed and resistant HL. This
      recommendation was confirmed in 2012 in the updated clinical practice
      guidelines of the National Comprehensive Cancer Network (USA) [a],
      and remains the standard throughout Europe [b]. Peggs recently
      chaired the expert panel on behalf of British Committee for Standards in
      Haematology for the development of guidelines in relapsed and resistant
      HL, which confirmed this position in the UK [c].
    In the last five years approximately 880 patients with relapsed and
      resistant HL have been treated in the UK with ASCT [d] and we
      estimate that 400 patients have been cured. In Europe 9,500 patients with
      relapsed and resistant HL underwent ASCT 2006-10, most using the BEAM
      regimen [e], with an estimated 4,300 cured.
    Following the successful results published from UCL, the number of RITs
      in relapsed and resistant HL has steadily risen in the UK, from 14 per
      annum in 2003/4, to 38-44 by 2006/7, and 62-64 by 2010/11, a rise of over
      300% [d]. This has also been the basis for the development of a
      prospective study in the UK (PAIReD), badged by both the NIHR Cancer
      Research Network (NCRN) and the British Society for Blood and Marrow
      Transplantation Clinical Trials Committee (BSBMT-CTC). Based on the
      outcomes achieved at our centre, we can predict that approximately 30-35
      patients are cured per year in the UK as a result of the allogeneic RIT
      strategy (equivalent to 150-175 over a five-year period), and that this
      number will increase with earlier application in the treatment pathway.
    As a result of the work at UCL, Peggs was asked to chair the BSBMT
      `indications' panel for lymphomas. The indications-tables are used as a
      template for commissioning transplant services in the UK. Allogeneic
      transplantation is now designated a `standard' therapy in patients with HL
      who have relapsed following ASCT, and as a `clinical option' in those with
      primary resistant or relapsed disease who remain chemo-sensitive [f].
      This ensures funding and equitable access to such therapies for all
      patients who might benefit from them across the UK.
    
ImpactSummary

    Clinical research from UCL established `salvage therapy' and autologous
      transplantation protocols for use in relapsed and resistant Hodgkin
      lymphoma and demonstrated the efficacy of such approaches. These
      treatments are now widely used standards of care. A reduced intensity
      transplant (RIT) regimen, incorporating alemtuzumab to reduce
      graft-versus-host disease, was also developed and a potent
      graft-versus-tumour effect was demonstrated. RIT treatments are now
      increasingly used in patients failing an autologous transplant and in
      those patients deemed to have a high risk of autograft failure, as
      determined by pre-transplant CT/PET scanning. We estimate that 5,000
      patients have been cured in the REF period as a result of our research.
    
UnderpinningResearch

    Each year in the UK, around 1,600 people are diagnosed with Hodgkin
      lymphoma. Treatment is usually very successful, and most people can be
      cured, or the lymphoma can be controlled for many years. However for
      around a quarter of patients, this is not the case. Our research has
      developed new treatment strategies for those patients for whom
      conventional therapy had failed.
    The regime we invented consists of two parts: initially high dose
      chemotherapy to ablate the bone marrow using the `BEAM' regimen (a
      combination of carmustine, etoposide, cytarabine and melphalan) followed
      by autologous stem cell transplantation (ASCT; using stem cells harvested
      previously from the patients blood). In a randomised trial designed and
      managed by researchers at UCL, this strategy was compared with the same
      drugs at lower non-marrow-ablative doses, without ASCT (mini-BEAM). The
      trial proved the efficacy of BEAM plus ASCT and established it as the
      global standard treatment for all patients failing conventional
      chemo/radiotherapy [1].
    In the mid-1990s, the use of granulocyte-colony stimulating factor
      (G-CSF) became standard practice because of its effect to stimulate the
      bone marrow to produce stem cells, which could then be harvested from the
      blood. Our research established the factors that were predictive of
      successful stem cell harvests, including the dose of stem cells to be
      administered for successful engraftment. Defining this dose helped to
      ensure that engraftment of the infused stem cells would occur in the
      minimal time with the maximum chances of success. This reduced the time
      needed to support the patient during the period when their bone marrow was
      non-functional, so reducing the risk of serious infection and bleeding [2].
    Despite these major advances the use of BEAM plus ASCT only `rescued'
      about 45% of patients. The remainder relapsed following autologous
      transplantation and had a dismal prognosis. Allogeneic transplantation
      (where the stem cells are from a donor rather than the patient's own) had
      demonstrated improved anti-lymphoma activity, an effect of the foreign
      stem cells that were infused to repopulate the bone marrow. However this
      procedure was too toxic in HL, with high mortality rates directly related
      to procedural toxicity. In addition, the donor stem cells mounted an
      immune response against not only the lymphoma, but other healthy tissues,
      so-called graft-versus-host disease (GvHD) which ranged from 45 to 60%. We
      introduced reduced intensity transplants (RITs) incorporating depletion of
      the harmful GvHD-inducing immune cells with alemtuzumab [3] but
      preserving those that had anti-lymphoma effects. This greatly reduced the
      toxicity and mortality associated with allogeneic transplantation. With
      safer transplants we were able to demonstrate the potential benefit of the
      allogeneic graft-versus-tumour effect in HL [4].
    Relapse of the patients' lymphoma became the primary cause for treatment
      failure. Researchers at UCL then pioneered the development of infusion of
      incrementally increasing doses of immune cells from the donor (donor
      lymphocyte infusions, DLIs) at later time points following allogenic
      transplantation (when the risk of induction of GvHD is lower) as a means
      to reduce or treat disease relapse in HL [5]. These were combined
      with a novel strategy for monitoring patients for early signs of relapse
      following transplantation utilising positron emission tomography (PET)
      scanning [6], enabling earlier delivery of DLIs. This combined
      approach delivered results that were significantly better than those seen
      in other countries, and has become standard practice throughout the UK.
      This difference has been widely ascribed to the novel strategy developed
      by UCL, relating both to the incorporation of T-cell depletion using the
      alemtuzumab antibody, and the strategy of post-transplant DLIs. Other
      countries are now evaluating similar strategies based on the research from
      UCL.
    