CaseStudyId: 43702
Title: 
    Challenging oral health inequalities through a public health approach to
      policy
    

ImpactDetails

    The research undertaken by the UCL Dental Public Health Group on the
      nature of oral health inequalities, the common shared determinants of oral
      and general health inequalities, and the design and approach needed to
      reduce inequalities has been highly influential in national and
      international oral health policy and in changing professional practice.
      Our research has helped to shift oral health policy from an isolated
      perspective, towards a more integrated public health approach.
    Our research on the common risk factor approach and the determinants of
      oral health inequalities has been highly influential on national oral
        health policy. As a result of the expertise developed through the
      underpinning research described above, Watt has advised on and authored a
      number of key national policies over the last decade, including the
      national strategy "Choosing Better Oral Health: An Oral Health Plan for
      England" which was first published in 2005 [a]. This key document
      has continued to inform national oral health policy throughout the current
      REF period including the approach adopted by Public Health England, who
      state that the research of our group provides a very important
      contribution to their overall agenda to improve the nation's health and
      address health inequalities [b]. In view of his common risk
      approach to oral and systemic health Watt was also a core member of the
      Department of Health working group which produced Delivering Better
        Oral Health: An evidence-based toolkit for prevention [c].
      This document was distributed to all general dental practitioners in
      England in April 2009. Its goal was to re-orientate dentists towards
      working in a more preventive manner based upon up-to-date scientific
      evidence. Specific areas of work included diet advice, smoking cessation
      support and brief interventions to reduce harmful alcohol intake.
    Smoking cessation: Watt chaired the group which wrote the
      Department of Health guidance document, Smokefree and Smiling: helping
        patients to quit tobacco [d]. This document provided
      guidance for primary care dental teams on the contribution that they can
      make to smoking cessation. In the same year he authored a smoking
      cessation training resource for dental teams, published by NICE which was
      designed to equip members of the dental team with the skills and knowledge
      needed to provide effective smoking cessation support [e]. The
      training materials were distributed to all undergraduate dental and oral
      hygiene and therapy schools in England. As a result of this work, combined
      with the toolkit set out in Delivering Better Oral Health,
      dentists do now routinely take a smoking history and are beginning to
      offer cessation advice or refer patients for specialist support. This is
      demonstrated by the results of the 2009 Adult Dental Health Survey which
      report increasing rates of smoking cessation advice delivered by dental
      teams [f].
    Maternal and child nutrition: In 2008, NICE issued guidance on
      Maternal and child nutrition (PH11) which aimed "to improve the
        nutrition of pregnant and breastfeeding mothers and children in
        low-income households." As a consequence of his earlier work on the
      social gradients associated with breast feeding and reference nutrient
      indicators in pre-school children, Watt was a member of the Programme
      Development Group and the only representative from an oral health
      background [g]. Specifically based upon the outcome and process
      evaluation of peer support infant feeding interventions, Watt provided
      detailed input on the peer support elements of the guidelines and also the
      incorporation of oral health in relation to sugars consumption.
    The incorporation of our research into oral health policy has since led
      to various changes in professional clinical practice amongst primary care
      dentists in England. The current care pathway of the Dental Contract
        Reform Programme is seeking to develop "a new contract model and
        way of working which shifts the focus of NHS dentistry from treatment
        and repair to prevention and oral health" [h]. The more
      integrated preventive approach based very much on our model of common risk
      factors through the inclusion of advice on diet, tobacco and alcohol.
      Present evidence suggests that this model would be acceptable to patients
      (for example nearly three-quarters of responding patients of the a pilot
      scheme of a new NHS contract "said they had a better understanding of
        their oral condition following their recent visit under the new system
        and a similar proportion said they had actually changed their oral
        hygiene habits as a result of their visit"), and that dentists will
      utilise resources more effectively and positively influence future NHS
      dental care as a result (only 8% of responding dentists indicated that
      they would not align their clinical practice to the new contract) [h].
    At a local level, the research outcomes have been highly influential in
      supporting the development of local oral health strategies and in
      particular the importance of adopting a common risk factor approach in
      tackling shared risks for a range of chronic conditions including oral
      diseases. Across the country many Primary Care Trusts and Local
      Authorities have used our work in shaping their local strategies. Good
      examples of this include the oral health strategies for Islington,
      Cambridgeshire and Norfolk [j, j, k].
    Our research has gone on to have an influence on oral health policy and
      practice in other parts of the world also. In Australia, our work
      was influential in informing the development and contents of both national
      and local policies. The Principal Population Oral Health Advisor in the
      Victoria State Government writes that "Over the last ten years their
        work has shaped key population oral health plans, policies and
        resources. These documents include the National Oral Health Plan &#8212;
      Health Mouths, Healthy Lives 2004-2013, the Evidence-based oral
      health resource, Department of Health Victoria, 2011 and the soon to
        be released National Oral Health Promotion Plan" [l].
      Attesting to a broader impact on the oral health agenda, the Chair of the
      Australian National Oral Health Promotion Plan Committee writes that: "International
        leadership in population oral health, especially with regards to
        promoting effective policies and interventions to reduce oral health
        inequities, is not a feature of the organized dental profession either
        in Australia or internationally... The work that you and your graduates
        have been championing is a major support to numerous academic, public
        health educators and researchers throughout the world struggling to have
        a policy impact in their national health agenda" [m].
    
ImpactSummary

    The UCL Dental Public Health Group have made a significant contribution
      to oral health policy in the UK and internationally through their research
      on oral health inequalities and the need for a reorientation of dental
      services towards a more evidence based, integrated preventive approach
      addressing common risks for oral diseases and other chronic conditions.
      Our work has influenced local national oral health policies and the
      development of clinical practice guidelines to reduce oral health
      inequalities and provide the opportunity for dental professionals to
      prevent both oral and systemic disease.
    
UnderpinningResearch

    Since 1995 the UCL Dental Public Health group have conducted research
      that has detailed the patterns of oral health inequalities, the presence
      of social gradients in oral health, and explored the psychosocial causes
      of oral health inequalities. This has led to the development and
      evaluation of community-based health improvement strategies which seek to
      lessen oral health inequality through adopting a common risk approach for
      both oral and general health.
    During the 1990s, the issue of inequalities in health more generally grew
      to prominence. We conducted pioneering work during this period to
      incorporate a consideration of inequalities in oral health into this wider
      health agenda. In a review in 1999, we provided, for the first time, a
      synthesis of the evidence for widening inequalities in oral health between
      social classes, regions of England, and among certain minority ethnic
      groups in pre-school children [1]. Leading on from this work, we
      developed a common risk factor approach based upon the general principles
      of health promotion, aiming to ensure that oral health programmes are not
      developed and implemented in isolation from other health programmes. The
      common risk factor approach addresses risk factors common to many chronic
      conditions within the context of the wider socio-environmental milieu.
      Oral health is determined by diet, hygiene, tobacco, alcohol use, stress
      and trauma. As these causes are common to a number of other chronic
      diseases, adopting a collaborative approach is more rational than one that
      is disease specific [2].
    We undertook secondary analyses of national data sets from a diverse
      range of countries including the UK, US, Brazil, Japan, South Korea and
      across the EU. These identified a social gradient (graded stepwise nature
      of outcomes across the entire social hierarchy) in a variety of oral
      health outcomes and at different points in the life course from early
      childhood, through adolescence to adulthood and older age [3]. Our
      work highlighted that the influences upon oral health inequalities are
      complex and include broad community, social, economic and psychosocial
      factors. Through systematic review we demonstrated the limitations of
      dental health education and clinical preventive interventions in tackling
      oral health inequalities as they fail to address the underlying social
      determinants [4].
    Two of the common risk factors which our work has focussed on are smoking
      and diet. In these areas we have developed, implemented and evaluated a
      range of community-based oral and systemic health improvement population
      interventions.
    Following the publication of the government's 1998 White Paper on
      measures to reduce smoking rates across the population, we conducted work
      to examine how dentists and their team members could become actively
      involved in these efforts. We conducted a needs assessment on behalf of
      the Health Education Authority to examine the status of smoking cessation
      in dental hygiene and dental therapy curricula and to develop appropriate
      teaching resources in this area. This identified a number of barriers to
      both teaching and practising smoking cessation [5]. We also
      conducted research to explore perceived barriers within dental teams. Key
      issues identified were: a fatalistic and negative concept of prevention;
      perceived lack of relevance of smoking cessation to dentistry; patient
      hostility; and organizational factors within the practice setting [6].
      Leading directly from this work, Watt co-wrote Helping Smokers Stop: A
        Guide for the Dental Team which was published by the Department of
      Health in 2004. Watt's work to develop smoking cessation activities in
      dental practice have continued since that time, and further aspects are
      described in Section 4 below.
    We have also conducted extensive research into diet and nutrition, as
      they relate to oral health. In the late 1990s, for example, we conducted a
      survey of infant feeding practices within the Asian community in Britain [7].
      We have conducted a randomised controlled trial to assess whether monthly
      home visits from trained volunteers could improve infant feeding practices
      at age 12 months in two disadvantaged inner city London boroughs. This
      found the home visits promoted aspects of recommended infant feeding
      practices including eating three solid meals per day, and eating more
      fruit and vegetables [8]. Our work also demonstrated that
      preventive dietary interventions to lessen obesity in young persons in the
      UK can be effectively delivered in the primary dental care setting.
    Researchers of UCL Dental Public Health who contributed to this work
      included: Professor Aubrey Sheiham (Emeritus Professor of Dental Public
      Health), Professor Richard Watt (Professor of Dental Public Health) and Dr
      George Tsakos (Senior lecturer in Dental Public Health).
    