CaseStudyId: 43817
Title: 
    Improving the evaluation and efficacy of conditional cash transfers in
        Latin America
    

ImpactDetails

    Conditional cash transfer (CCT) programmes have been hailed as highly
      effective in Mexico and many other countries in Latin America and around
      the world, where they have been instrumental in reducing poverty and
      improving social indicators for many poor households. They have also been
      widely studied by academic researchers, in part because of the
      availability of rich data collected to evaluate them. Professor Attanasio
      has been a major contributor to both policy and academic debate about such
      programmes; as a result, he and his research have played an important role
      in the development and design of CCTs benefiting millions of people in
      Latin America.
    Examples of the impacts of Attanasio's research on individual CCT
      programmes in Latin America are described below; the broader significance
      of his work, however, is suggested by its citation more than 50 times in
      the 2009 World Bank Policy Research report, Conditional Cash
        Transfers: Reducing Present and Future Poverty. This influential
      report shaped the World Bank's policy on providing US$ 2.4 billion in
      lending to scale up and start CCT operations in 2009 alone [1, 2].
    Reshaping Oportunidades (Mexico): PROGRESA, which was renamed
      Oportunidades in 2003 when it was expanded to urban areas, is one of the
      most successful cash transfer programmes in Latin America and a key
      instrument of Mexican social policy. The programme now has over 20 million
      beneficiaries and is widely seen as an effective method of reducing
      poverty (especially in rural Mexico), increasing enrolment in secondary
      school, improving the nutritional status of children and empowering women
      living in poor households.
    Between 2002 and 2008, Attanasio's work as a member of the advisory board
      supporting the evaluation of Oportunidades by the Government of Mexico
      (see [a] [b] and [d]) allowed him to recommend a set of changes which, he
      argued, would maximise the benefits of conditional cash transfers. In 2009
      the Mexican government followed this advice in its expansion of the
      programme to the cities of Puebla and Ecatepec. In particular, it drew on
      Attanasio's research to pilot a revised grant structure abolishing primary
      school grants and increasing those supporting secondary school attendance
      [4]. These changes were introduced in Puebla and Ecatepec, each of which
      has over 2 million inhabitants, many of whom live in poverty. Since the
      evaluation had revealed relatively small impacts of the existing programme
      on school enrolment in urban areas, it was particularly salient to
      redesign the programme in this way before it was rolled out in these
      cities.
    Two versions of the programme, revised to reflect findings and
      recommendations in [a] and [b], were piloted in Puebla and Ecatepec
      between 2008 and 2011, alongside a traditional version of the programme.
      Both of the alternative versions eliminated primary school grants and
      increased secondary school grants; in one version, however, a further
      increase in school grants was triggered by academic performance meeting
      certain minimum standards. New families registered into the CCT in these
      cities were randomly allocated either to one of these two new versions, or
      to the traditional version of the programme. In January 2008, Professor
      Attanasio was invited by the Mexican government and the IADB to advise on
      the design of this experiment, and to direct its evaluation, which the
      IADB partly financed; he did so between 2008 and 2010.
    In 2008, of the 35,000 households included in the programme in Puebla and
      Ecatepec, about 9,000 were included in the experiment. Of these, a control
      group of around 3,000 were assigned to the original programme and 6,000 to
      the two new versions. The evaluation found that the new grant structure &#8212;
      which added about 15% to the traditional secondary school grant &#8212;
      increased the attendance of girls in Ecatepec (but not Puebla) by about
      8%. The results of the study were presented in a report delivered to the
      IADB and the Mexican government in 2011.
    The results of the evaluation prompted a significant change in and
      benefit to the Mexican government's approach to Oportunidades [3],
      particularly in terms of enhancing understanding of those modifications to
      the programme that would improve secondary school attendance without
      significant extra cost [10]. Research was the main reason behind the
      Mexican government's decision in subsequent years to reshape school
      assistance programmes [10]. A change in government at the end of 2011
      delayed the implementation of these modifications for political reasons,
      but by mid-2013 Attanasio's findings were again being studied and
      considered by the new Oportunidades administration to inform planned
      changes throughout Mexico. This is demonstrated by the fact that in July
      2013 the IADB requested Attanasio's advice on forthcoming changes to the
      programme. He was invited to meet and advise the new administration on the
      design and evaluation of all changes to Oportunidades between 2014 and
      2018 [5].
    Expansion of Familias in Acciones (Colombia): Between 2004 and
      2006 Attanasio presented the results of his evaluation of the Colombian
      CCT programme, Familias en Accion through a series of briefings for
      policymakers [c, d, e] and officers from the World Bank and IADB. At that
      time, the Colombian government was thinking of closing down Hogares
      Comunitarios (HC), a large community nursery programme reaching 1 million
      children, to finance the possible expansion of Familas en Accion. The
      evaluation conducted by Attanasio and his team had also considered the
      impacts of HC [d], finding that it had positive effects on the nutritional
      status of the poorest young children. Attanasio's research was key in
      ensuring that, during its expansion phase, the project&#180;s design followed
      evidence-based best practices and included a solid impact evaluation
      design [10].
    In 2005, and again in 2007, the Colombian government drew explicitly on
      Attanasio's evaluation to inform its expansion of Familias en Accion [6].
      These successive expansions made Familias en Accion the country's largest
      welfare programme throughout the impact census period. In 2008 the
      programme was piloted in Bogota, where the government experimented with
      different grant structures, some of which were inspired by the advice
      given in Attanasio and his co-authors' reports. Although these expansions
      took place before the start of the impact period, the benefits are both
      ongoing and substantial for the 3 million households affected by them [6].
    In 2009 Professor Attanasio's close engagement with the Familias en
      Accion programme led to an important collaborative project (funded by the
      ESRC, the IADB, the World Bank and DfID to a total of about &#163;1 million)
      piloting an 18-month stimulation and nutrition intervention to foster
      cognitive development in young children in Colombia. The intervention was
      tested in 96 small towns, each with 5,000-50,000 inhabitants, and targeted
      children aged 12-24 months. Part of its novelty lay in its delivery by
      community women who acted as representatives of Familas en Accion. The
      intervention, which was significantly underpinned by the collaboration
      with Attanasio, demonstrated a remarkable impact on children's cognitive
      and language development. As well as benefiting the children involved in
      it (who showed cognition and language improvements of about 25% of a
      standard deviation of the score), the project increased awareness of the
      importance of child development, and of the pivotal role that mothers and
      the immediate family could play in promoting that, even when financial
      resources are limited [7]. The project was awarded a prize for outstanding
      international impact at the ESRC Celebrating Impact Awards 2013.
    This pilot project also made significant contributions to policy
        discussion, debate and formulation both in Colombia and more widely,
      including through two large events organised by the research team to
      disseminate its findings among decision-makers around the world. The
      first, held in Bogota on 26 March 2012 and co-organised with the IADB, was
      attended by Colombian policymakers, practitioners and researchers who had
      the opportunity to discuss the lessons learned from the Familias en Accion
      example [8]. The second was a conference on `Early Childhood Development
      and Human Capital Accumulation', held in London on 25-26 June 2012.
      Co-organised with the International Initiative for Impact Evaluation
      (3IE), this academic conference included a high level of participation by
      practitioners, donors, and government officials from all over the world,
      who discussed how this cutting-edge research could be applied to their own
      national contexts [9]. Professor Attanasio has also presented the
      project's results in a number of other forums, e.g. a high-profile
      conference at the National Academy of Sciences (March 2013) and a webinar
      for the van Leer foundation (May 2013). Written summaries of the project
      and its preliminary findings were widely disseminated, generating
      considerable attention amongst policymakers within and beyond Colombia.
      This led, for example, in early 2013 to a technical assistance
      collaboration with the Peruvian Government, facilitated by the IADB.
      Drawing on their experience and the results of the research conducted in
      Colombia, the research team has since supported the Peruvian Government in
      the design of a comparable home visiting programme targeting children 0-3
      years old, which is a fundamental component of their wider early childhood
      development strategy (Cuna M&#225;s) [7]. The programme was launched on 24
      March 2013, and will eventually reach millions of poor children in Peru.
    
ImpactSummary

    Research conducted at UCL by Professor Orazio Attanasio and his direct
      engagement with policymakers has been instrumental in the implementation,
      design and evaluation of conditional cash transfer (CCT) programmes to
      stimulate the accumulation of human capital in Mexico and Colombia. The
      research underpinned the design of an innovative pilot, which he also
      evaluated, in two major cities, Puebla and Ecatepec, with a combined
      population of around 4 million. In Colombia, an evaluation led by
      Professor Attanasio led to improvements in and expansions of the CCT
      programme, with ongoing benefits to 3 million households. The research
      team also contributed to a child development programme that launched in
      Peru in March 2013.
    
UnderpinningResearch

    The Mexican conditional cash transfer (CCT) PROGRESA, launched in 1997,
      was the first of a new generation of welfare programmes that have since
      become one of the most popular forms of policy intervention in Latin
      America and many other developing countries. CCT programmes transfer cash
      to poor households if they comply with a set of conditions that typically
      have to do with the accumulation of human capital, for instance sending
      children to school or bringing them to health centres for growth and
      development check-ups. The cash transfers are targeted at women.
    Professor Orazio Attanasio (UCL Professor of Economics since 1995) has
      conducted extensive research on both the Mexican and the Colombian
      versions of this programme. This has included analyses of the impacts of
      CCTs on a variety of outcomes in both countries, from school enrolment and
      consumption to women's empowerment (see, for example, [d] and [e] in
      section 3). In 2001, in collaboration with colleagues at UCL and the
      Institute for Fiscal Studies (IFS), Attanasio began to evaluate the
      Colombian version of the CCT programme, Familias en Accion.
    From 2002 to 2008, Attanasio was part of an academic advisory group
      assisting the Mexican government with the evaluation and redesign of its
      CCT programme, PROGRESA, which they planned to expand to urban areas under
      the new title of Oportunidades (launched 2003). As well as making
      recommendations about the design of that urban expansion scheme, the group
      designed and implemented its evaluation. In addition to the general design
      of that evaluation, Attanasio was specifically responsible for evaluating
      the effect of the transfer on household consumption and expenditure [d].
    In [b], first circulated in 2001 and published in 2012 as an influential
      and heavily cited article, Attanasio, in collaboration with Costas Meghir
      (Professor at UCL until 2011) and Ana Santiago (a PhD student at UCL)
      analysed the impact of PROGRESA. They combined the evaluation analysis
      with the use of a structural model to address the issue of the programme's
      optimal design.
    An important feature of PROGRESA was the inclusion of a rigorous process
      for evaluating its impacts, based on the allocation of its early
      implementation to randomly chosen localities. In [a] and [b], Attanasio
      used data collected from an evaluation survey to assess the programme's
      impact. Moreover, they used that data to estimate a behavioural model of
      education choices, which could be used not only to assess the impact of
      the programme, but also to predict the effects of different
      designs on student enrolment. As such, it could be used to revise and
      refine existing programmes and devise new ones to maximise their
      beneficial effects.
    The research found that PROGRESA's impact was substantial for attendance
      in high school, but close to zero for primary school, partly because
      primary school enrolment was already very high. At the same time, however,
      primary school grants constituted the most expensive component of the
      programme. Attanasio advised that the programme's impact could be
      increased by changing the structure of its grants. More specifically, he
      recommended reducing (or abolishing) primary school grants to free up
      resources to increase the amount of secondary school grants.
    In 2001, with funding from the World Bank and the Inter-American
      Development Bank (IADB), and in collaboration with a Colombian public
      policy institute and a data collection firm, Attanasio designed and
      directed an impact evaluation of the Colombian CCT programme, Familias en
      Acci&#243;n. Results presented in 2004 and 2006 showed that the programme had
      impacts on children's nutritional status and secondary school enrolment
      mainly in rural areas, while the effects in urban centres were more
      limited. This led to the production of three reports for the Colombian
      government, the World Bank and the IADB that were widely circulated among
      policymakers. It also generated several academic papers on the impacts of
      the CCT programme (on school enrolment [e] and other outcomes), as well as
      other related programmes. These included a paper on community nurseries
      written with M. Vera (lecturer at UCL) and V. DiMaro (doctoral student at
      UCL) [c] which shows that the community nurseries had a positive impact on
      children from the poorest families.
    