CaseStudyId: 43827
Title: 
    New treatment and treatment monitoring for iron overload in thalassaemia
      patients
    

ImpactDetails

    Two key changes in practice have arisen from our research. Firstly, there
      have been improvements in chelation treatment for patients with
      transfusional and non-transfusional iron overload, particularly with the
      orally active chelator deferasirox. Secondly, there is improved monitoring
      of patients with transfusional iron overload. This has resulted in
      improved rates of survival from iron overload and better quality of life
      for patients. Over half the TM patients in the UK [390] are followed by
      the Joint Red Cell Unit of UCLH and the Whittington Hospital, led by
      Porter (the UK Registry). Recent analysis has shown that survival is
      improving progressively. The decade to 2009 saw an almost three-fold fall
      in the proportion of patients with myocardial iron overload. Mortality is
      substantially lower and cardiac iron overload is no longer the leading
      cause of mortality [a].
    The underpinning research described above, from preclinical to clinical
      stages of development, has resulted in deferasirox, a novel orally active
      chelating agent, becoming the first line treatment for transfusional iron
      overload in the developed world. It was licensed by the FDA in 2005 [b]
      and the EMA in 2006 [c]. Porter's contribution to the development
      of deferasirox was recognised by Novartis when he was asked to accept the
      Prix Galien prize at the House of Commons in 2008, awarded to Novartis for
      innovative research in development in orphan drugs [d].
      Deferasirox is now recommended in guidelines issued by the Thalassaemia
      International Federation (TIF) [e], by the UK Thalassaemia Society
      [f] in Canada [g] and in the US [h]. In excess of
      65,000 patients have received deferasirox, a cumulative exposure of
      163,350 patient years, with global sales exceeding $800m annually [i].
      Use of this drug results in improved quality of life for patients, because
      they no longer need to endure treatment administered by prolonged
      infusion, but can take an orally active medication [j]. In 2012,
      the license for deferasirox was extended to include the new indication of
      the treatment of iron overload in non-transfusion dependent thalassaemia.
      These patients become iron-overloaded because of excess iron absorption
      from the GI tract, and deferasirox is now indicated where alternative iron
      chelators are ineffective or poorly tolerated [k].
    Improved monitoring had been particularly advanced by the use of MRI to
      identify patients with the highest risk of cardiac disease from iron
      overload. Early identification of high-risk patients allows intervention
      with intensification of chelation therapy. This approach is now
      recommended worldwide, as described in a recent review of guidelines which
      said: "All guidelines recommend cardiac siderosis assessment by cardiac
        T2* MRI" [l]. In the UK, longitudinal monitoring by cardiac
      MRI has become standard practice [m]. This approach is
      increasingly impacting on survival and quality of lives of children and
      young adults with TM at risk of death each year in low and middle income
      countries.
    
ImpactSummary

    The iron and red cell disorders group at UCL has worked for over 20 years
      on the pathophysiology of transfusion-dependent iron overload in
      thalassaemia patients, using models of iron uptake and overload and
      translating these into clinical practice. In collaboration with Novartis,
      a new treatment, deferasirox, was developed, which is now the treatment of
      choice for iron overload in the western world. In addition, a method for
      monitoring iron overload in the heart was developed in collaboration with
      Dr Pennell at the Brompton and pioneered in patients at UCL Hospital
      (UCLH) and the Whittington Hospital. This has become the standard approach
      worldwide.
    
UnderpinningResearch

    Around 7% of the global population carries an abnormal haemoglobin gene
      and between 300,000 and 500,000 children are born with clinically
      significant haemoglobin disorders annually, predominantly in developing
      countries. About 30% have thalassaemia syndromes, and for
      transfusion-dependent thalassaemia major (TM) an estimated 50-100,000
      children die each year in low and middle income countries. This is mainly
      due to the effects of iron deposition in the liver, heart and endocrine
      system, originating from multiple blood transfusions. Ultimately this is
      fatal if the iron overload is not prevented. Iron initially accumulates in
      the liver but, if not controlled by chelation therapy, may spread to the
      heart causing heart failure from the second decade of life, which has been
      the commonest cause of death in TM. Until recently the only way to prevent
      iron overload was with the chelator desferrioxamine, which had to be given
      via a needle and by continuous infusion for 8-12 hours a day at least 5
      days per week. The burden of such a regimen was enormous and compliance
      often poor.
    From 1992 Professor John Porter advised Ciba-Geigy (now Novartis) about
      oral chelators at both the pre-clinical and clinical stages of development
      and an alternative chelating agent (deferasirox) was then developed by
      Novartis. Porter was involved in the planning and execution of pivotal
      registration trials (0107, 0108 [1-4] and 0109 [5]), which
      established the role of deferasirox in the treatment of liver and heart
      iron overload. Porter also played a central role in the design,
      recruitment and interpretation of the pivotal study that determined the
      place of deferasirox in patients aged 10 years and older who have chronic
      iron overload as a result of non-transfusion-dependent thalassaemia (NTDT)
      [6].
    UCL investigators also have a long-standing interest in monitoring the
      effects of iron chelators on heart failure in iron overload conditions [7]
      and in collaboration with cardiologists at Brompton Hospital and UCLH have
      been at the forefront of MRI developments for cardiac iron quantification.
      This has been key to evaluating the effects of chelators on iron
      mobilisation from the heart [8] and is now viewed as essential for
      optimal management of heavily transfused patients and determining the
      response to therapy. Patients in heart failure can be rescued as a late
      event when in heart failure with reversal of cardiomyopathy and good
      long-term survival [7]. Patients at UCLH and Whittington were the
      first cohort of patients to be studied, in collaboration with the MRI unit
      at the Brompton Hospital, using cardiac MRI. It is now clear that the
      highest risk patients can be identified by cardiac MRI and treatment
      intensified in those with high cardiac iron.
    