CaseStudyId: 43830
Title: 
    Rare diseases research and translation in muscle channelopathies:
      establishing a national diagnostic service and developing the first proven
      effective treatment for patients
    

ImpactDetails

    Patients with genetic muscle channelopathies experience debilitating
      episodes of muscle paralysis (periodic paralysis) and/or episodes of
      severe muscle stiffness (myotonia or paramyotonia). Many patients develop
      significant disabling permanent muscle weakness over time. Accurate
      diagnosis is difficult as the conditions are rare, so affected patients
      often experience a long delay of years before a correct diagnosis is
      achieved and effective treatment instituted. Unfortunately patients are
      often misdiagnosed and sometimes the variable severity and intermittent
      nature of some of the symptoms leads to the erroneous suggestion that the
      symptoms are psychological. Specialist clinical, electrophysiological and
      molecular genetic assessment is required to make an accurate diagnosis.
    As a result of our research, our centre was commissioned by NHS Highly
      Specialised Services to provide the only diagnostic and treatment centre
      in the UK for channelopathies. We are directly funded by the Department of
      Health to provide this service, which has received in excess of &#163;6m to
      date. Our clinical service offers a one-stop, same-day assessment in which
      over 2,000 patients to date have been evaluated clinically and then
      undergo detailed electrophysiological testing in collaboration with a
      consultant neurophysiologist. With informed consent, patients are then
      offered detailed genetic testing to achieve a DNA-based diagnosis in the
      DNA laboratory. Patients are followed up to receive genetic counselling
      and treatment. Effective medications are available in accurately diagnosed
      patients and often significantly improve quality of life [a]. We
      are now the only UK national reference laboratory for genetic muscle
      channelopathies, and our service is recognised by the European network for
      rare disease diagnosis [b].
    Our research has defined the best practice in treating patients with
      these rare conditions, as recognised by the Specialised Commissioning
      Group who say: "The work of the Queen Square NCST group collating and
        the related research group has been at the forefront of developing the
        international evidence base for best practice in diagnostics [DNA and
        Electrophysiology] and patient management over the past 10 years" [c]
    In terms of diagnostics, we have devised very efficient pathways
      including novel electrophysiological protocols to aid rapid diagnosis and
      gene testing selection [d]. We have performed over 8,000 genetic
      tests and 1,000 electrophysiological tests on patients since the service
      began. Previously this patient group often did not receive an accurate
      diagnosis or their conditions were labelled as psychogenic. Often there
      were unacceptably long delays in making the diagnosis and this has been
      changed.
    As described in section 2, our highly phenotyped genetically stratified
      cohorts have allowed us to lead the first international randomised trial
      of a treatment in a muscle channelopathy. This identified an effective
      treatment for muscle channelopathy patients and was published in JAMA 2012
      with an accompanying full editorial entitled "Mexiletine for the treatment
      of myotonia: a triumph for rare disease networks" [e]. It also
      attracted much attention from patient groups and the scientific community
      [f]. We now have successfully obtained exclusive Orphan drug
      indication for mexiletine with the European Medicines Agency which is a
      critical step in enabling and supporting the process for full marketing
      authorisation and European licensing of mexiletine for this indication [g].
    We support many patient organisations and provide national patient
      education days. Hanna is a member of the Medical Advisory Council for
      Periodic Paralysis International, an international patient organisation
      based in Canada [h]. He also acts as scientific advisor to the
      Channelopathy Foundation, based in Switzerland [i]. At the Centre
      for Neuromuscular Diseases we hold annual Patient Information Days on
      muscle channelopathies; these include interactive patient talks,
      opportunities to meet scientists and doctors and patient-led "ask the
      experts" question sessions [i].
    
ImpactSummary

    Understanding and finding treatments for rare disease represents a major
      challenge across medicine. We have shown this is possible for rare muscle
      channelopathies and our work has directly benefited the lives of patients.
      Our 15 year basic research programme has elucidated the genetic
      architecture and identified new disease mechanisms for these disabling
      muscle conditions. We also determined the true disease frequency through
      the only UK epidemiology study. We translated fundamental research into
      new DNA-based diagnostic testing and electrophysiological diagnostics for
      rapid and reliable diagnosis. Our research led directly to our centre
      being commissioned by the NHS (&#163;6m) as the only UK centre for diagnosis
      and management and we established the UK NHS national genetics
      channelopathy reference laboratory. We have built the world's largest
      genetically stratified patient cohorts which allowed us to lead the first
      international randomised controlled trial. This trial showed clear
      efficacy of a reprofiled mexiletine. This led to a successful European
      orphan product status application for this indication and national
      treatment guidelines.
    
UnderpinningResearch

    Many important neurological diseases are episodic causing patients to
      experience attacks of unpredictable severe neurological dysfunction
      separated by periods of apparent normality. The commonest episodic
      neurological disorders are epilepsy and migraine and their precise
      molecular pathophysiology is an important unsolved neuroscience challenge.
      In addition, there are severe disabling disorders of episodic muscle
      dysfunction such as episodic total muscle paralysis and intermittent and
      severe disabling muscle stiffness-myotonia affecting 1 in 50,000 people
      worldwide.
    Over the last 15 years we have established a world leading collaborative
      interdisciplinary clinical, genetic and cellular electrophysiological
      research programme led by Professor Michael Hanna in the UCL Institute of
      Neurology that has progressed fundamental understanding of the
      pathophysiology of episodic neurological diseases, and has resulted in new
      diagnostic tests speeding diagnosis and improving patient outcomes. We
      collated the world's largest cohort of over 1,800 families with inherited
      channelopathies and have identified hundreds of unique mutations in
      specific genes responsible for the diseases. The molecular
      electrophysiological consequences on single ion channel function have been
      studied using detailed cellular expression techniques allowing a more
      precise understanding of the underlying pathophysiology. Many key
      observations have been made that have resulted in improved fundamental
      knowledge which has translated into improved diagnostics and patient
      outcomes [1].
    By studying large groups of patients with different intermittent muscle
      symptoms we have been able to show how genetic dysfunction of muscle
      sodium, potassium, calcium or chloride channels can relate to specific
      episodic muscle conditions including periodic paralysis, muscle stiffness
      syndromes (myotonia) and episodic cardiac arrhythmias [2]. We have
      shown that the genetic architecture of the commonest form of periodic
      paralysis predicts the presence of an abnormal gating pore current in
      muscle sodium or calcium channels supporting the presence of a brand new
      mechanism for disease causation [3]. We have also defined
      previously unrecognised neonatal ion channel diseases including
      intermittent neonatal hypotonia and neonatal stridor. In addition, we have
      shown that mutations in important presynaptic neuronal potassium and
      calcium channels can lead to episodic ataxia &#8212; a disorder characterized by
      profound disabling attacks of unpredictable unsteadiness. Furthermore, we
      have shown that such patients are 17 times more likely to develop epilepsy
      compared to the background population risk [1].
    We have shown that therapy response relates to genotype and this has
      directed more effective therapy selection with clear positive patient
      impact [4]. We developed highly specialized electrophysiological
      techniques that we apply to patients and we have shown that this allows us
      to predict the likely genotype and direct genetic testing [5].
    We have led international randomised controlled trials in the UCL MRC
      Centre for Neuromuscular Disease, Directed by Hanna, and recently
      established the first proven treatment in muscle channelopathy [6].
      This has led to a successful European orphan status applications and new
      guidelines.
    