CaseStudyId: 43997
Title: 
    Improved management of Acanthamoeba keratitis
    

ImpactDetails

    Our work has impacted on the prevention, diagnosis and treatment of AK.
      Guidelines for the prevention of AK now incorporate our findings. For
      example, the British Contact Lens Association's Guide for
        practitioners and support staff on reducing infection risk in contact
        lens patients makes several references to our work on risk factors
      in relation to swimming, extended-wear contact lenses, and hygiene related
      to contact lens cases [a]. Guidance from the College of
      Optometrists on the treatment of AK cites a study conducted at Moorfields
      (Lim et al 2008) which built on the underpinning research described above
      [b]. We have also worked to raise practitioner and public awareness
      of the risks for AK &#8212; for example our research was widely reported in 2008
      [c], and the topic featured in a 2011 article, Contact Lens
        Problems on patient.co.uk (citing our work), and in a 2013 case
      study article in The Optician [d].
    Our work on risk factors for AK has been incorporated into contact lens
      packaging. Furthermore, our work led to a new disposable contact lens case
      being supplied with each bottle of contact lens solution sold. Our
      research has stimulated further work to develop new and improved cleaning
      solutions and cases, and has been cited in many patents for such products
      [e]. Our demonstration that chlorine-based solutions are not
      effective against AK has led to this type of solution being removed from
      the market &#8212; for example Softab in 1995. In 2007, a similar occurrence of
      an outbreak of AK infection was identified in the USA using our methods,
      and was associated with the use of Complete Moisture Plus. This solution
      was withdrawn and accordingly no such solutions were available in the
      period 2008-13. Our research is used by manufacturers in the development
      of more appropriate solutions, for example, Menicon cite our research in
      their evaluation of the efficacy of a new multipurpose solution, MeniCare
      Soft, against Acanthamoeba [f].
    PCR for diagnosis of AK is becoming widely used in routine diagnostic
      laboratories [g]. The sensitivity of this technique is between
      85-95% (compared to culture, at up to 60%), and with 100% specificity. Our
      clinical studies have identified the importance of early diagnosis and
      introduction appropriate therapy (within three weeks of onset) as the
      major predictor of disease outcomes, since corroborated by independent
      studies [h].
    Biguanides (PHMB and chlorhexidine) with or without a diamidine
      (propamidine or hexamidine) have become the standard of care for this
      condition around the world [i]. A survey of US ophthalmologists
      and vision scientists conducted in 2011 revealed that "most respondents
        (97.6%) had used combination therapy with multiple agents to treat
        acanthamoeba keratitis at some point in the past, whereas a smaller
        proportion (47.6%) had ever used monotherapy. Respondents most commonly
        chose polyhexamethylene biguanide as the ideal choice for monotherapy
        (51.4%), and dual therapy with a biguanide and diamidine as the ideal
        choice for combination therapy (37.5%)" [j].
    We have also formulated the only available guidelines both for the
      management of persistently culture positive cases (about 5% of our
      series), and for the management of the severe scleral inflammation that is
      associated with the disease but which is unrelated to direct invasion of
      organisms, and which has been the major reason for enucleation at our
      centre; this treatment involves the use of systemic immunosuppressive
      therapy and effective topical anti-amoebic therapy [k].
    
ImpactSummary

    Our research identified an epidemic of Acanthamoeba infection
      amongst UK contact lens wearers, established the epidemiology of
      infection, introduced improved approaches to contact lens hygiene,
      developed the most sensitive test to make a diagnosis and discovered a new
      treatment for established infection. This has impacted on contact lens
      wearers around the world, forming the basis for guidelines and patient
      information leaflets, types of contact lens solutions, and treatments for
      this rare but devastating condition.
    
UnderpinningResearch

    Acanthamoeba keratitis (AK) is a rare corneal infectious disease caused
      by the pathogenic free-living protozoan Acanthamoeba spp. Incidence of
      the infection is low (1 in 100,000 in the EU), but has potentially
      devastating consequences, causing vision to deteriorate and leading to
      permanent blindness. In countries with a high prevalence of contact lens
      wearing, this accounts for over 85% of cases of AK infection, but it can
      also occur after corneal trauma, particularly in rural environments. AK is
      on the rise in developing economies and there is no approved drug to treat
      this disease. Through the systematic study of AK at the UCL Institute of
      Ophthalmology (IoO), including laboratory, epidemiological and clinical
      research, we have identified avoidable risk factors, developed better
      techniques for diagnosis, and introduced and developed a novel class of
      topical disinfectants (the biguanides).
    Risk factors:
    Through an integrated programme of epidemiological and clinical research
      we first established that an epidemic of cases of AK had developed in the
      UK in contact lens users in the 1990s. This was shown to be the result of
      both reduced lens hygiene compliance, and because of the use of chlorine
      disinfection solutions, which are ineffective against Acanthamoeba.
      Users of the then newly introduced monthly disposable contact lenses were
      at particular risk [1]. We subsequently showed in two national
      surveys of AK that the disease was up to 20 times more common in the UK
      than has been reported elsewhere, and that the incidence was increased in
      hard water areas; a previous clinical study had shown that limescale build
      up on domestic taps in hard water areas, harboured Acanthamoeba,
      probably by providing the mixed microbial microenvironment that the
      organism favours [2]. We subsequently demonstrated that
      genetically identical organisms, present in their contaminated domestic
      water supply, had infected a high proportion of AK patients [3].
    We have shown that good contact lens hygiene practice is critical to the
      prevention of AK including regular disinfection of lenses and lens case
      hygiene or the use of daily disposable lenses, which eliminates the need
      for lens disinfection and contact lens case use. In addition to hygiene we
      have identified the risks of exposure to contaminated water by showering
      and swimming whilst wearing contact lenses [2].
    Diagnosis
    In addition, our research has demonstrated that diagnosis and treatment
      within 3 weeks of onset improves outcomes [4]. We were the first
      to investigate the value of the identification of Acanthamoeba DNA
      by Polymerase Chain Reaction (PCR) as the most sensitive and specific
      method for the diagnosis of AK, since confirmed by several other
      independent studies [5]. We have also investigated the use of
      confocal microscopy, another widely used imaging technique for diagnosis,
      particularly in the USA. We performed a masked multi-observer study and
      measured the sensitivity and predictive value of this technique and the
      resulting potential for misdiagnosis [6].
    Treatment:
    Acanthamoeba is notoriously difficult to treat (most patients with
      cerebral disease die). In the eye, disease persists because the cysts are
      resistant to most antimicrobials. At the same time that we recognised the
      epidemic of cases in the UK there was little really effective treatment
      apart from the use of a diamidine, to which many cases were resistant. The
      result was that patients needed therapeutic corneal transplant surgery
      with poor outcomes and high morbidity. In response to this we collaborated
      with a protozoologist (Dr Simon Kilvington, University of Leicester) who
      suggested the use of the biguanide Polyhexamethyl biguanide (PHMB) also
      known as Polyhexanide. This was used as a swimming pool disinfectant, to
      which the encysted from of Acanthamoeba was susceptible. We
      introduced this in clinical studies with a dramatic and beneficial effect
      on outcomes [7]. The success of polyhexanide as a therapy has been
      recognised by the awarding of a EU grant of &#8364;4,050,255 to the Orphan Drug
      for Acanthamoeba Keratitis (ODAK) project in 2012. Another biguanide,
      chlorhexidine, has also been introduced, building on our early work. There
      are no other anti-amoebics available that are consistently effective
      against the encysted from of the organism.
    