CaseStudyId: 43996
Title: 
    Improving the validity of autism spectrum disorder assessment nationally
    

ImpactDetails

    Improved diagnosis of autism spectrum disorders
    Through the underpinning research described above, we developed a new
      diagnostic test for ASD, the computerised Developmental, Dimensional
        and Diagnostic Interview (3Di) [a]. We also established a company
      (IXDX Ltd) to oversee the training of clinicians in how to use this
      product [b]. In the period 2008-13, over 1,000 clinicians from the
      UK and around the world were trained to use the interview. The majority of
      these have been psychiatrists, paediatricians and clinical psychologists
      working in the NHS. Courses have been held throughout the UK, including
      some specifically commissioned by NHS Education Scotland and by the Welsh
      Assembly, who have funded courses across Wales over the last five years,
      as part of the ASD Strategic Action Plan [c]. Courses have also
      been run in South-East Asia, Europe and South America [d].
    The 3Di is now in regular use in the UK and around the world. For
      example, a survey of clinicians in Wales in 2011 revealed that the 3Di was
      the most popular history-taking instrument in the diagnosis of autism
      spectrum disorders [e]. At our own specialised clinic for High
      Functioning Autistic Disorders &#8212; the first such national dedicated
      multidisciplinary clinic for this patient group in the UK &#8212; we see over
      300 patients per year for assessment and treatment, and the 3Di is used in
      all clinical assessment procedures. Our research directly informs the way
      we provide services [f]. The National Autistic Society recommends
      our clinical services for parents of children in mainstream school, who
      are suspected of having an autistic spectrum disorder.
    Use of the 3Di has led to an improvement in the standard of clinical
      assessment of autism spectrum disorders. One NHS Consultant Child and
      Adolescent Psychiatrist reports the following: "Feedback from patients
        and their families has been excellent... Other agencies (e.g. Children's
        Services and Education) have commented favourably upon the value of such
        a thorough assessment, in the context of observations of the child. I
        have been using the 3Di for several years and each one of my patients
        has derived benefit from a greater understanding of their difficulties"
      [g].
    Guidelines
    The 3Di is recommended in NICE Clinical Guideline 128, Autism in
        Children and Young People. [h]. Similarly, the Scottish
      Intercollegiate Guidelines Network recommend use of the 3Di in Clinical
      Guideline 98, Assessment, diagnosis and clinical interventions for
        children and young people with autism spectrum disorders [i].
    Our work has influenced the revision of the Diagnostic and Statistical
      Manual of the American Psychiatric Association (DSM-5), published in May
      2013. This included major changes to the content and structure of autistic
      symptoms. The committee identified studies conducted with the 3Di as
      offering the best test of the proposed revised symptom model. The DSM-5
      workgroup also acknowledged that the 3Di offers a unique opportunity to
      study phenotypic features not captured by other instruments. Studies by
      our team, which focused on children who failed to meet all diagnostic
      criteria for `classical autism' as conventionally defined, influenced the
      introduction of a new diagnostic term `Social Communication Disorder' in
      DSM-5 [j].
    International use of the test
    Several 3Di translations including Thai, Flemish, Dutch and Spanish [k]
      have been made available. Other countries in which translations are in
      regular usage range from Scandinavia (Norway, Sweden, Finland) through the
      United Arab Emirates and India, to Hong Kong. A Swahili version is
      currently underway, our first in Sub-Saharan Africa. We have been invited
      to train practitioners in the standardised diagnostic process of autistic
      disorder evaluation, using our procedures, in over 20 countries worldwide.
      In 2011-12, for example, we trained over 230 practitioners across
      Argentina in a Spanish translation of our procedures [l]. The
      President of the Argentine Program for Children, Adolescents and Adults
      with Autism Spectrum Conditions (Panaacea) reports that: "In Argentina,
        the 3Di is currently the most used diagnostic interview in the ASD
        field. The general feedback has been that the 3Di is a very valuable
        instrument in clinical settings, reliable and easy to use."
    Informing and stimulating public debate
    Our work on raising awareness of the dimensional characteristics of
      autistic disorders has had national and international coverage. For
      example, 3Di work on sex differences was featured on Radio 4's Woman's
      Hour, and our research has featured on blogs such as John Brock's Cracking
        the Enigma, where a post on our research entitled `What is PDD-NOS?'
      has received over 300,000 hits [m]. In particular, our work has
      informed public and media debate about how ASD should be defined and who
      should qualify for the diagnosis. Mandy was quoted in a recent Scientific
      American piece about whether the new DSM-5 ASD diagnostic criteria will
      unfairly exclude some children [n]. A number of articles in
      newsletters of the Simons Foundation Autism Research Initiative (SFARI)
      have highlighted our research in this area, and these articles have
      garnered many comments from interested members of the public [o].
    
ImpactSummary

    Our research has had substantial impact on the mental health and welfare
      of children with suspected autistic disorders, on their education, on the
      well-being of their families, and on the activities of healthcare
      professionals and their services for children in both paediatric and
      psychiatric practice. We developed a new diagnostic test for autistic
      spectrum disorders, which allows for better, more reliable diagnosis of
      these conditions. The test has been included in healthcare guidelines and
      professional standards in the UK and many other countries around the
      world, including influencing the revision of the Diagnostic and
      Statistical Manual of the American Psychiatric Association (DSM-5).
    
UnderpinningResearch

    Since the mid-1990s, the UCL Institute of Child Health has, with
      international grant funding, supported a research programme into the
      diagnosis of autism spectrum disorders (ASD), combining both clinical and
      epidemiological research. This has been led by Professor David Skuse, in
      his role both as head of the Behavioural and Brain Sciences Unit at the
      Institute, and also as head of the clinical Social and Communication
      Disorders Clinic (National Centre for High Functioning Autism) at Great
      Ormond Street Hospital. In this work he has collaborated with Dr William
      Mandy (Division of Psychology and Language Sciences) over the past decade.
    In the context of an innovative programme of research, which was at its
      inception the only such programme world-wide dedicated to studying
      high-functioning ASD, we developed the first computerised interview-based
      procedure for the assessment of autistic disorders. Our design
      conceptualised autistic traits as comprising sets of related symptoms that
      were continuous with typical development, and thus dimensional in
      character. We recognised the value of computerisation as a way of
      summarising complex data through clinical enquiry that could efficiently
      combine unprecedented phenotypic detail with unprecedented reliability [1].
    Our work led to the establishment of the largest and most detailed
      phenotypic database of autistic children (~2000) outside North America.
      This database was compiled, and has been managed by Mandy. Based upon the
      systematic collection of DNA from families attending clinical services at
      Great Ormond Street, combined with phenotypic fidelity, we became the
      largest contributor to the autism component of the UK10k Exome-Sequencing
      project. With colleagues at Cold Spring Harbor we contributed to the first
      evidence, published in Science, which described copy number
      variations as an important risk factor in autism [2].
    As well as clinical studies, we have also engaged in genetic
      epidemiological research, based on screening instruments we developed to
      measure autistic traits in the general population [3]. In
      collaboration with the Avon Longitudinal Study of Parents and Children we
      have shown that gene variants, formerly thought to be exclusively related
      to ASD, influence sub-clinical autistic traits in typical children too [4].
      These findings have contributed to the current view that ASD is a
      dimensional disorder, with no clear boundary between normality and
      abnormality [5].
    Joint research led by Mandy and Skuse, based on the uniquely dense
      phenotyping they had compiled for cases/controls on their database, led to
      the discovery that autism-related social and communication impairments are
      closely correlated, both in clinically-identified and in typical
      populations. This finding contributed to the current revision in the
      guidelines for ASD diagnosis recently published by the American
      Psychiatric Association (DSM-5) and influenced the decision to simplify
      the diagnostic rubric for ASD [6]. The revision allowed the
      incorporation into the autism spectrum of atypical cases where functional
      impairment was nevertheless severe [7].
    